Skip to main content
Search

 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
BOOKS
 
VIDEO
 
AUDIO
 
SOFTWARE
 
IMAGES
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
ABOUT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE  CONTACT JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE
Full text of "What Is Mathematics"
See other formats
KXXXXXXKXKXXXXXXKK 


XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX 

X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 

RATAN TATA LIBRARY K 

Delhi University Library System 

WARNING : X 





RATAN TATA LIBRARY, (DULS) 

(Delhi School of Economics) 


Cl. No. E). ^ I .. . . ^ 

Ac. NO. 1(3072 oq 

This book should be returned on or before the date last 
stamped below. An overdue charge of 10 Paisas per day 
on general books and 25 Raise per day on text book will be 
charged for the first two days and 50 Raise from the thiid 
day thebcrok is k^pt overtime. 






WHAT IS 


Mathematics? 


AN ELEMENTARY APPROACH TO 
IDEAS AND METHODS 

BY 

RICHARD COURANT 

Late of the 

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences 
New York University 

AND 

HERBERT ROBBINS 

Columbia University 


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

Oxford New York Toronto Melbourne 




OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Oxford London Glasgow 
New York Toronto Melbourne Wellington 
Ibadan Nairobi Dares Salaam Cape Town 
Kuala Lumpur Singapore Jakarta Hong Kong Tokyo 
Delhi Bombay Calcutta Madras Karachi 


Copyright, 1941, by Richard Courant 
Copyright Renewed 1969 by Richard Courant 
All rights reserved, including the right 
to reproduce this book or portions 
thereof in any form 


First published by Oxford University Presi, New York, 1941 
First issued as an Oxford University Press paperback, 1978 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Courant, Richard, 1888- 
What is mathematics? 

“Suggestions for further reading”: pp. 511-14 
Includes index. 

1, Mathematics, I. Robbins, Herbert Ellis, joint author. II. Title. 
QA37.C675 510 41-25632 

ISBN 0-19-502517-2 pbk. 

9 


Printed in the United States of America 



DEDICATED TO 


ERNEST, GERTRUDE, HANS 
AND LEONORE COURANT 




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 

For more than two thousand years some familiarity with mathematics 
has been regarded as an indispensable part of the intellectual equipment 
of every cultured person. Today the traditional place of mathematics 
in education is in grave danger. Unfortunately, professional repre¬ 
sentatives of mathematics share in the responsibility. The teaching 
of mathematics has sometimes degenerated into empty drill in problem 
solving, which may develop formal ability but does not lead to real 
understanding or to greater intellectual independence. Mathematical 
research has shown a tendency toward overspecialization and over¬ 
emphasis on abstraction. Applications and connections with other fields 
have been neglected. However, such conditions do not in the least 
justify a policy of retrenchment. On the contrary, the opposite reaction 
must and docs arise from those who are aware of the value of intellectual 
discipline. Teachers, students, and the educated public demand 
constructive reform, not resignation along the line of least resistance. 
The goal is genuine comprehension of mathematics as an organic whole 
and as a basis for scientific thinking and acting. 

Some splendid books on biography and history and some provocative 
popular writings have stimulated the latent general interest. But 
knowledge cannot be attained by indirect means alone. Understanding 
of mathematics cannot be transmitted by painless entertainment any 
more than education in music can be brought by the most brilliant 
journalism to those who never have listened intensively. Actual con¬ 
tact with the content of living mathematics is necessary. Neverthe¬ 
less technicalities and detours should be avoided, and the presentation 
of mathematics should be just as free from emphasis on routine as from 
forbidding dogmatism which refuses to disclose motive or goal and which 
is an unfair obstacle to honest effort. It is possible to proceed on a 
straight road from the very elements to vantage points from which the 
substance and driving forces of modern mathematics can be surveyed. 

The present book is an attempt in this direction. Inasmuch as it 
presupposes only knowledge that a good high school course could 
impart, it may be regarded as popular. But it is not a concession to 
the dangerous tendency toward dodging all exertion. It requires a 



PREFACE 


certain degree of intellectual maturity and a willingness to do some 
thinking on one’s own. The book is written for beginners and 
scholars, for students and teachers, for philosophers and engineers, for 
class rooms and libraries. Perhaps this is too ambitious an intention. 
Under the pressure of other work some compromise had to be made in 
publishing the book after many years of preparation, yet before it was 
really finished. Criticism and suggestions will be welcomed. 

At any rate, it is hoped that the book may serve a useful purpose as 
a contribution to American higher education by one who is profoundly 
grateful for the opportunity offered him in this country. While re¬ 
sponsibility for the plan and philosophy of this publication rests with 
the undersigned, any credit for merits it may have must be shared 
with Herbert Robbins. Ever since he became associated with the task, 
he has unselfishly made it his own cause, and his collaboration has 
played a decisive part in completing the work in its present form. 

Grateful acknowledgment is due to the help of many friends. Dis¬ 
cussions with Niels Bohr, Kurt Friedrichs, and Otto Neugebauer have 
influenced the philosophical and historical attitude; Edna Kramer has 
given much constructive criticism from the standpoint of the teacher; 
David Gilbarg prepared the first lecture notes from which the book 
originated; Ernest Courant, Norman Davids, Charles de Prima, Alfred 
Horn, Herbert Mintzer, Wolfgang Wasow, and others helped in the 
endless task of writing and rewriting the manuscript, and contributed 
much in improving details; Donald Flanders made many valuable sug¬ 
gestions and scrutinized the manuscript for the printer; John Knudsen, 
Hertha von Gumppenberg, Irving Ritter, and Otto Neugebauer pre¬ 
pared the drawings; H. Whitney contributed to the collection of 
exercises in the appendix. The General Education Board of the Rocke¬ 
feller Foundation generously supported the development of courses and 
notes which then became the basis of the book. Thanks are also due to 
the Waverly Press, and in particular Mr. Grover C. Orth, for their 
extremely competent work; and to the Oxford University Press, in particu¬ 
lar Mr. Philip Vaudrin and Mr. W. Oman, for their encouraging initiative 
and cooperation. 

New Rochelle, N. Y., August 22, 1941. 

R. Courant. 



PREFACE TO THE SECOND, THIRD AND 
FOURTH EDITIONS 


During the last years the force of events has led to an increased demand 
for mathematical information and training. Now more than ever there 
exists the danger of frustration and disillusionment unless students and 
teachers try to look beyond mathematical formalism and manipulation 
and to grasp the real essence of mathematics. This book was written 
for such students and teachers, and the response to the first edition 
encourages the authors in the hope that it will be helpful. 

Criticism by many readers has led to numerous corrections and im¬ 
provements. For generous help with the preparation of the fouiib 
edition cordial thanks are due to Mrs. Natascha Artin. 


R. Courant 


New Rochelle, N. Y., March 18, 1943. 

October 10, 1945. 
October 28, 1947. 



HOW TO USE THE BOOK 

The book is written in a systematic order, but it is by no means 
necessary for the reader to plow through it page by page and chapter 
by chapter. For example, the historical and philosophical introduction 
might best be postponed until the rest of the book has been read. The 
different chapters are largely independent of one another. Often the 
beginning of a section will be easy to understand. The path then 
leads gradually upward, becoming steeper toward the end of a chapter 
and in the supplements. Thus the reader who wants general information 
rather than specific knowledge may be content with a selection of ma¬ 
terial that can be made by avoiding the more detailed discussions. 

The student with slight mathematical background will have to make 
a choice. Asterisks or small print indicate parts that may be omitted 
at a first reading without seriously impairing the understanding of 
subsequent parts. Moreover, no harm will be done if the study of 
the book is confined to those sections or chapters in which the reader is 
most interested. Most of the exercises are not of a routine nature; 
the more difficult ones are marked with an asterisk. The reader should 
not be alarmed if he cannot solve many of these. 

High school teachers may find helpful material for clubs or selected 
groups of students in the chapters on geometrical constructions and on 
maxima and minima. 

It is hoped that the book will serve both college students from fresh¬ 
man to graduate level and professional men who are genuinely interested 
in science. Moreover, it may serve as a basis for college courses of an 
unconventional type on the fundamental concepts of mathematics. 
Chapters III, IV, and V could be used for a course in geometry, while 
Chapters VI and VIII together form a self-contained presentation of the 
calculus with emphasis on understanding rather than routine. They 
could be used as an introductory text by a teacher who is willing to make 
active contributions in supplementing the material according to specific 
needs and especially in providing further numerical examples. Numer¬ 
ous exercises scattered throughout the text and an additional collection 
at the end should facilitate the use of the book in the class room. 

It is even hoped that the scholar will find something of interest in 
details and in certain elementary discussions that contain the germ of a 
broader development. 



CONTENTS 


Prbpacb to First Edition 
Prbpacb to Second Edition 
How TO Use the Book 
What is Mathematics? 

Chapter I. The Natural Numbers . 1 

Introduction. 1 

§1. Calculation with Integers. 1 

1. Laws of Arithmetic. 2. The Representation of Integers. 3. 
Computation in Systems Other than the Decimal. 

§2. The Infinitude of the Number System. Mathematical Induction... 9 
1. The Principle of Mathematical Induction. 2. The Arithmetical 
Progression. 3. The Geometrical Progression. 4. The Sum of the 
First n Squares. 5. An Important Inequality. 6. The Binomial 
Theorem. 7. Further Remarks on Mathematical Induction. 

Supplement to Chapter I. The Theory of Numbers . 21 

Introduction. 21 

§1. The Prime Numbers. 21 

1. Fundamental Facts. 2. The Distribution of the Primes, 
a. Formulas Producing Primes, b. Primes in Arithmetical Pro¬ 
gressions. c. The Prime Number Theorem, d. Two Unsolved 
Problems Concerning Prime Numbers. 

§2. Congruences. 31 

1. General Concepts. 2. Fermat’s Theorem. 3. Quadratic 
Residues. 

§3. Pythagorean Numbers and Fermat’s Last Theorem. 40 

§4. The Euclidean Algorithm. 42 

1. General Theory. 2. Application to the Fundamental Theorem 
of Arithmetic. 3. Euler’s Function. Fermat’s Theorem Again. 

4. Continued Fractions. Diophantine Equations. 

Chapter II. The Number System of Mathematics. 62 

Introduction. 52 

§1. The Rational Numbers. 52 

1. Rational Numbers as a Device for Measuring. 2. Intrinsic Need 
for the Rational Numbers. Principle of Generalization. 3. Geo¬ 
metrical Interpretation of Rational Numbers. 

§2. Incommensurable Segments, Irrational Numbers, and the Concept of 

Limit. 68 

1. Introduction. 2. Decimal Fractions. Infinite Decimals. 3. 
Limits. Infinite Geometrical Series. 4. Rational Numbers and 
Periodic Decimals. 6. General Definition of Irrational Numbers 
by Nested Intervals. 6. Alternative Methods of Defining Irra¬ 
tional Numbers. Dedekind Cuts. 

53. Remarks on Analytic Geometry. 72 

1. The Basic Principle. 2. Equations of Lines and Curves. 

















CONTENTS 


§4. The Mathematical Analysis of Infinity. 77 

1. Fundamental Concepts. 2. The Denumerability of the Rational 
Numbers and the Non-Denumerability of the Continuum. 3. 
Cantor’s “Cardinal Numbers.** 4. The Indirect Method of Proof. 

5. The Paradoxes of the Infinite. 6. The Foundations of Mathe¬ 
matics. 

§6. Complex Numbers. 88 

1. The Origin of Complex Numbers. 2. The Geometrical Inter¬ 
pretation of Complex Numbers. 3. De Moivre’s Formula and the 
Roots of Unity. 4. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. 

§6. Algebraic and Transcendental Numbers. 103 

1. Definition and Existence. 2. Liouville’s Theorem and the 
Construction of Transcendental Numbers. 

Supplement to Chapter II. The Algebra of Sets . 108 

1. General Theory. 2. Application to Mathematical Logic. 3. 

An Application to the Theory of Probability. 

Chapter III. Geometrical Constructions. The Algebra of Number 

Fields . 117 

Introduction. 117 

Part I. Impossibility Proofs and Algebra. 120 

§1. Fundamental Geometrical Constructions. 120 

1. Construction of Fields and Square Root Extraction. 2. Regular 
Polygons. 3. Apollonius* Problem. 

52. Constructible Numbers and Number Fields. 127 

1. General Theory. 2. All Constructible Numbers are Algebraic. 

§3. The Unsolvability of the Three Greek Problems. 134 

1. Doubling the Cube. 2. A Theorem on Cubic Equations. 3. 
Trisecting the Angle. 4. The Regular Heptagon. 5. Remarks on 
the Problem of Squaring the Circle. 

Part II. Various Methods for Performing Constructions. 140 

54. Geometrical Transformations. Inversion. 140 

1. General Remarks. 2. Properties of Inversion. 3. Geometrical 
Construction of Inverse Points. 4. How to Bisect a Segment and 
Find the Center of a Circle with the Compass Alone. 

55. Constructions with Other Tools. Mascheroni Constructions with 

CompMs Alone. 146 

1. A Classical Construction for Doubling the Cube. 2. Restriction 
to the Use of the Compass Alone. 3. Drawing with Mechanical 
Instruments. Mechanical Curves. Cycloids. 4. Linkages. 
Peaucellier’s and Hart’s Inversors. 

56. More About Inversion and its Applications. 158 

1. Invariance of Angles. Families of Circles. 2. Application to 
the Problem of Apollonius. 3. Repeated Reflections. 

Chapter IV. Pbojsctivb Geometry. Axiomatics. Non-Euglidean 

Geometries. 165 

51 . Introduction. 165 

1. Classification of Geometrical Properties. Invariance under 
Transformations. 2. Projective Transformations. 



















CONTENTS 


§2. Fundamental Conoepts. 168 

1. The Group of Projective Transformations. 2. Desargues’s 
Theorem. 

§3. Cross-Ratio. 172 

1. Definition and Proof of Invariance. 2. Application to the 
Complete Quadrilateral. 

54. Parallelism and Infinity. 180 

1. Points at Infinity as '^Ideal Points.” 2. Ideal Elements and 
Projection. 3. Cross-Ratio with Elements at Infinity. 

56. Applications. 185 

1. Preliminary Remarks. 2. Proof of Desargues’s Theorem in the 
Plane. 3. Pascal’s Theorem. 4. Brianchon’s Theorem. 5. Re¬ 
mark on Duality. 

56. Analytic Representation. 191 

1. Introductory Remarks. 2. Homogeneous Coordinates. The 
Algebraic Basis of Duality. 

57. Problems on Constructions with the Straightedge Alone. 196 

58. Conics and Quadric Surfaces. 198 

1. Elementary Metric Geometry of Conics. 2. Projective Prop¬ 
erties of Conics. 3. Conics as Line Curves. 4. Pascal’s and 
Brianchon’s General Theorems for Conics. 6. The Hyperboloid. 

59 . Axiomatics and Non-Euclidean Geometry.214 

1. The Axiomatic Method. 2. Hyperbolic Non-Euclidean Geome¬ 
try. 3. Geometry and Reality. 4. Poincare’s Model. 5. Elliptic 
or Riemannian Geometry. 

Appendix. Geometry in More than Three Dimensions .227 

1. Introduction. 2. Analytic Approach. 3. Geometrical or 
Combinatorial Approach. 

Chapter V. Topology . 235 

Introduction. 235 

51. Euler’s Formula for Polyhedra. 236 

52 . Topological Properties of Figures. 241 

1. Topological Properties. 2. Connectivity. 

53 . Other Examples of Topological Theorems.244 

1. The Jordan Curve Theorem. 2. The Four Color Problem. 3. 

The Concept of Dimension. 4. A Fixed Point Theorem. 5. Knots. 

54 . The Topological Classification of Surfaces. 256 

1. The Genus of a Surface. 2. The Euler Characteristic of a 
Surface. 3. One-Sided Surfaces. 

Appendix . 264 

1. The Five Color Theorem. 2. The Jordan Curve Theorem for 
Polygons. 3. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. 

Chapter VI. Functions and Limits . 272 

Introduction.272 

51 . Variable and Function.273 

1. Definitions and Examples. 2. Radian Measure of Angles. 

3. The Graph of a Function. Inverse Functions. 4. Compound 
Functions. 5. Continuity. 6. Functions of Several Variables. 

7. Functions and Transformations. 






















CONTENTS 


§2. Limits. .289 

1 . The Limit of a Sequence a». 2. Monotone Sequences. 3. 
Euler’s Number e. 4. The Number ir. 5. Continued Fractions. 

S3. Limits by Continuous Approach. 303 

1 . Introduction. General Definition. 2. Remarks on the Limit 
Concept. 3. The Limit of sin xjx, 4. Limits a.ax—^ w. 

§4. Precise Definition of Continuity. 310 

§6. Two Fundamental Theorems on Continuous Functions. 312 

1 . Bolzano’s Theorem. 2. Proof of Bolzano’s Theorem. 3. Weier- 
strass’ Theorem on Extreme Values. 4. A Theorem on Sequences. 
Compact Sets. 

§6. Some Applications of Bolzano’s Theorem. 317 

1 . Geometrical Applications. 2. Application to a Problem in 
Mechanics. 

Supplement TO Chapter VI. More Examples on Limits and Continuity . . 322 

§1. Examples of Limits.322 

1 . General Remarks. 2. The Limit of g". 3. The Limit of \^p. 

4. Discontinuous Functions as Limits of Continuous Functions. 

5. Limits by Iteration. 

§2. Example on Continuity. 327 

Chapter VII. Maxima and Minima . 329 

Introduction. 329 

§1. Problems in Elementary Geometry. 330 


1. Maximum Area of a Triangle with Two Sides Given. 2. Heron’s 
Theorem. Extremum Property of Light Rays. 3. Applications to 
Problems on Triangles. 4. Tangent Properties of Ellipse and 
Hyperbola. Corresponding Extremum Properties. 5. Extreme 
Distances to a Given Curve. 


§2. A General Principle Underlying Extreme Value Problems. 338 

1 . The Principle. 2. Examples. 

§3. Stationary Points and the Differential Calculus. 341 

1 . Extrema and Stationary Points. 2. Maxima and Minima of 
Functions of Several Variables. Saddle Points. 3. Minimax 
Points and Topology. 4. The Distance from a Point to a Surface. 

§4. Schwarz’s Triangle Problem. 346 

1 . Schwarz’s Proof. 2. Another Proof. 3, Obtuse Triangles. 

4. Triangles Formed by Light Rays. 5. Remarks Concerning 
Problems of Reflection and Ergodic Motion. 

j6. Steiner’s Problem. 354 

1. Problem and Solution. 2. Analysis of the Alternatives. 3. A 
Complementary Problem. 4. Remarks and Exercises. 5 Gen¬ 
eralization to the Street Network Problem. 

(6. Extrema and Inequalities...361 

1. The Arithmetical and Geometrical Mean of Two Positive Quanti¬ 
ties. 2. Generalization to n Variables. 3. The Method of Least 
Squares. 


















CONTENTS 


§7. The Exifltence of an Extremum. Dirichlet^a Principle. 366 

1 . General Remarks. 2. Examples. 3. Elementary Extremum 
Problems. 4. Difficulties in Higher Cases. 

§8. The Isoperimetric Problem.373 

§9. Extremum Problems with Boundary Conditions. Connection 

Between Steiner*s Problem and the Isoperimetric Problem. 376 

§10. The Calculus of Variations.379 

1. Introduction. 2. The Calculus of Variations. Fermat^s Prin¬ 
ciple in Optics. 3. Bernoulli’s Treatment of the Brachistochrone 
Problem. 4. Geodesics on a Sphere. Geodesics and Maxi-Minima. 

§11. Experimental Solutions of Minimum Problems. Soap Film Ex¬ 
periments. 385 

1. Introduction. 2. Soap Film Experiments. 3. New Experi¬ 
ments on Plateau’s Problem. 4. Experimental Solutions of Other 
Mathematical Problems. 

Chapter VIII. The Calculus.398 

Introduction.398 

§1. The Integral. 399 

1 . Area as a Limit. 2. The Integral. 3. General Remarks on the 
Integral Concept. General Definition. 4. Examples of Integra¬ 
tion. Integration of 5. Rules for the “Integral Calculus ” 

§2. The Derivative. 414 

1. The Derivative as a Slope. 2. The Derivative as a Limit. 3. 
Examples. 4. Derivatives of Trigonometrical Functions. 5. Dif¬ 
ferentiation and Continuity. 6. Derivative and Velocity. Second 
Derivative and Acceleration. 7. Geometrical Meaning of the 
Second Derivative, 8. Maxima and Minima. 

§3. The Technique of Differentiation. 427 

§4. Leibniz’ Notation and the “Infinitely Small’’. 433 

§5. The Fundamental Theorem of the Calculus. 436 

1 . The Fundamental Theorem. 2. First Applications. Integra¬ 
tion of x**, cos X, sin x. Arc tan x. 3. Leibniz’ Formula for ir. 

§6. The Exponential Function and the Logarithm.442 

1. Definition and Properties of the Logarithm. Euler’s Number e. 

2. The Exponential Function. 3. Formulas for Differentiation of 
c*, a*, X*. 4. Explicit Expressions for c, e*, and log x as Limits. 

5. Infinite Series for the Logarithm. Numerical Calculation. 

§7. Differential Equations.453 

1. Definition. 2. The Differential Equation of the Exponential 
Function. Radioactive Disintegration. Law of Growth. Com¬ 
pound Interest. 3. Other Examples. Simplest Vibrations. 4. 
Newton’s Law of Dynamics. 

Supplement TO Chapter VIII.462 

§1. Matters of Principle.462 

1. Differentiability.* 2. The Integral. 3. Other Applications of 
the Concept of Integral. Work. Length. 



















CONTENTS 


§2. Orders of Magnitude.469 

1 . The Exponential Function and Powers of x, 2. Order of Magni¬ 
tude of log (nl). 

{3. Infinite Series and Infinite Products.472 

1. Infinite Series of Functions. 2. Euler’s Formula, cos x + t sin x 
-> e^. 3. The Harmonic Series and the Zeta Function. Euler’s 
Product for the Sine. 

$4. The Prime Number Theorem Obtained by Statistical Methods.482 

Appendix: Supplementary Remarks, Problems, and Exercises . 487 

Arithmetic and Algebra. 487 

Analytic Geometry.488 

Geometrical Constructions. 494 

Projective and Non-Euclidean Geometry. 495 

Topology.496 

Functions, Limits, and Continuity. 499 

Maxima and Minima.600 

The Calculus. 602 

Technique of Integration. 604 

Suggestions for Further Reading . 611 

Index. 616 


















WHAT IS MATHEMATICST 

Mathematics as an expression of the human mind reflects the active 
will, the contemplative reason, and the desire for aesthetic perfection. 
Its basic elements are logic and intuition, analysis and construction, 
generality and individuality. Though different traditions may em¬ 
phasize different aspects, it is only the interplay of these antithetic 
forces and the struggle for their synthesis that constitute the life, useful¬ 
ness, and supreme value of mathematical science. 

Without doubt, all mathematical development has its psychological 
roots in more or less practical requirements. But once started under 
the pressure of necessary applications, it inevitably gains momentum in 
itself and transcends the confines of immediate utility. This trend from 
applied to theoretical science appears in ancient history as well as in 
many contributions to modem mathematics by engineers and physicists. 

Recorded mathematics begins in the Orient, where, about 2000 B.C., 
the Babylonians collected a great wealth of material that we would 
classify today under elementary algebra. Yet as a science in the modem 
sense mathematics only emerges later, on Greek soil, in the fifth and 
fourth centuries B.C. The ever-increasing contact between the Orient 
and the Greeks, beginning at the time of the Persian empire and reaching 
a climax in the period following Alexander's expeditions, made the 
Greeks familiar with the achievements of Babylonian mathematics and 
astronomy. Mathematics was soon subjected to the philosophical dis¬ 
cussion that flourished in the Greek city states. Thus Greek thinkers 
became conscious of the great difficulties inherent in the mathematical 
concepts of continuity, motion, and infinity, and in the problem of 
measuring arbitrary quantities by given units. In an admirable effort 
the challenge was met, and the result, Eudoxus' theory of the geometri¬ 
cal continuum, is an achievement that was only paralleled more than 
two thousand years later by the modern theory of irrational numbers. 
The deductive-postulational trend in mathematics originated at the 
time of Eudoxus and was crystallized in Euclid's Elementa, 

However, while the theoretical and postulational tendency of Greek 
mathematics remains one of its important characteristics and has exer- 



WHAT IS MATHEMATICS? 


cised an enormous influence, it cannot be emphasized too strongly that 
application and connection with physical reality played just as im¬ 
portant a part in the mathematics of antiquity, and that a manner of 
presentation less rigid than Euclid’s was very often preferred. 

It may be that the early discovery of the difficulties connected with 
‘‘incommensurable’^ quantities deterred the Greeks from developing the 
art of numerical reckoning achieved before in the Orient. Instead they 
forced their way through the thicket of pure axiomatic geometry. 
Thus one of the strange detours of the history of science began, and 
perhaps a great opportunity was missed. For almost two thousand 
years the weight of Greek geometrical tradition retarded the inevitable 
evolution of the number concept and of algebraic manipulation, which 
later formed the basis of modem science. 

After a period of slow preparation, the revolution in mathematics 
and science began its vigorous phase in the seventeenth century with 
analytic geometry and the differential and integral calculus. While 
Greek geometry retained an important place, the Greek ideal of axio¬ 
matic crystallization and systematic deduction disappeared in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Logically precise reasoning, 
starting from clear definitions and non-contradictory, “evident” axioms, 
seemed immaterial to the new pioneers of mathematical science. In a 
veritable orgy of intuitive guesswork, of cogent reasoning interwoven 
with nonsensical mysticism, with a blind confidence in the superhuman 
power of formal procedure, they conquered a mathematical world of 
immense riches. Gradually the ecstasy of progress gave way to a 
spirit of critical self-control. In the nineteenth century the immanent 
need for consolidation and the desire for more security in the extension 
of higher learning that was prompted by the French revolution, in¬ 
evitably led back to a revision of the foundations of the new mathe¬ 
matics, in particular of the differential and integral calculus and the 
underlying concept of limit. Thus the nineteenth century not only 
became a period of new advances, but was also characterized by a 
successful return to the classical ideal of precision and rigorous proof. 
In this respect it even surpassed the model of Greek science. Once 
more the pendulum swung toward the side of logical purity and abstrac¬ 
tion. At present we still seem to be in this period, although it is to be 
hoped that the resulting unfortunate separation between pure mathe¬ 
matics and the vital applications, perhaps inevitable in times of critical 
revision, will be followed by an era of closer unity. The regained in¬ 
ternal strength and, above all, the enormous simplification attained on 



WHAT IS MATHEMATICS? 


the basis of clearer comprehension make it possible today to master the 
mathematical theory without losing sight of applications. To establish 
once again an organic union between pure and applied science and a 
sound balance between abstract generality and colorful individuality 
may well be the paramount task of mathematics in the immediate 
future. 

This is not the place for a detailed philosophical or psychological 
analysis of mathematics. Only a few points should be stressed. There 
seems to be a great danger in the prevailing overemphasis on the deduc- 
tive-postulational character of mathematics. True, the element of 
constructive invention, of directing and motivating intuition, is apt to 
elude a simple philosophical formulation; but it remains the core of any 
mathematical achievement, even in the most abstract fields. If the 
crystallized deductive form is the goal, intuition and construction are 
at least the driving forces. A serious threat to the very life of science 
is implied in the assertion that mathematics is nothing but a system 
of conclusions drawn from definitions and postulates that must be 
consistent but otherwise may be created by the free will of the mathema¬ 
tician. If this description were accurate, mathematics could not attract 
any intelligent person. It would be a game with definitions, rules, and 
syllogisms, without motive or goal. The notion that the intellect can 
create meaningful postulational systems at its whim is a deceptive half- 
truth. Only under the discipline of responsibility to the organic whole, 
only guided by intrinsic necessity, can the free mind achieve results 
of scientific value. 

While the contemplative trend of logical analysis does not represent 
all of mathematics, it has led to a more profound understanding of 
mathematical facts and their interdependence, and to a clearer compre¬ 
hension of the essence of mathematical concepts. From it has evolved 
a modern point of view in mathematics that is typical of a universal 
scientific attitude. 

Whatever our philosophical standpoint may be, for all purposes of 
scientific observation an object exhausts itself in the totality of possible 
relations to the perceiving subject or instrument. Of course, mere 
perception does not constitute knowledge and insight; it must be co¬ 
ordinated and interpreted by reference to some underlying entity, a 
‘‘thing in itself,” which is not an object of direct physical observation, 
but belongs to metaphysics. Yet for scientific procedure it is important 
to discard elements of metaphysical character and to consider observable 
facts always as the ultimate source of notions and constructions. To 



WHAT IS MATHEMATICS? 


renounce the goal of comprehending the ‘'thing in itself/^ of knowing 
the “ultimate truth,“ of unraveling the innermost essence of the world, 
may be a psychological hardship for naive enthusiasts, but in fact it 
was one of the most fruitful turns in modern thinking. 

Some of the greatest achievements in physics have come as a reward 
for courageous adherence to the principle of eliminating metaphysics. 
When Einstein tried to reduce the notion of “simultaneous events occur¬ 
ring at different places’^ to observable phenomena, when he unmasked 
as a metaphysical prejudice the belief that this concept must have a 
scientific meaning in itself, he had found the key to his theory of rela¬ 
tivity. When Niels Bohr and his pupils analyzed the fact that any 
physical observation must be accompanied by an effect of the observing 
instrument on the observed object, it became clear that the sharp 
simultaneous fixation of position and velocity of a particle is not possible 
in the sense of physics. The far-reaching consequences of this discovery, 
embodied in the modem theory of quantum mechanics, are now familiar 
to every physicist. In the nineteenth century the idea prevailed that 
mechanical forces and motions of particles in space are things in them¬ 
selves, while electricity, light, and magnetism should be reduced to or 
“explained^^ as mechanical phenomena, just as had been done with heat. 
The “ether^^ was invented as a hypothetical medium capable of not 
entirely explained mechanical motions that appear to us as light or 
electricity. Slowly it was realized that the ether is of necessity unob¬ 
servable; that it belongs to metaphysics and not to physics. With 
sorrow in some quarters, with relief in others, the mechanical explana¬ 
tions of light and electricity, and with them the ether, were finally 
abandoned. 

A similar situation, even more accentuated, exists in mathematics. 
Throughout the ages mathematicians have considered their objects, 
such as numbers, points, etc., as substantial things in themselves. 
Since these entities had always defied attempts at an adequate descrip¬ 
tion, it slowly dawned on the mathematicians of the nineteenth century 
that the question of the meaning of these objects as substantial things 
does not make sense within mathematics, if at all. The only relevant 
assertions concerning them do not refer to substantial reality; they 
state only the interrelations between mathematically “undefined ob¬ 
jects^' and the rules governing operations with them. What points, 
lines, numbers “actually” are cannot and need not be discussed in 
mathematical science. What matters and what corresponds to “verifi¬ 
able” fact is structure ana relationship, that two points determine a 



WHAT IS MATHEMATICS? 


line, that numbers combine according to certain rules to form other 
numbers, etc. A clear insight into the necessity of a dissubstantiation 
of elementary mathematical concepts has been one of the most im¬ 
portant and fruitful results of the modem postulational development. 

Fortunately, creative minds forget dogmatic philosophical beliefs 
whenever adherence to them would impede constructive achievement. 
For scholars and layman alike it is not philosophy but active experience 
in mathematics itself that alone can answer the question: What is 
mathematics? 




CHAPTER I 

THE NATURAL NUMBERS 

INTRODUCTION 

Number is the basis of modern mathematics. But what is number? 
What does it mean to say that ^ + = and (—1) ( — 1) = 1? 

We learn in school the mechanics of handling fractions and negative 
numbers, but for a real understanding of the number system we must go 
back to simpler elements. While the Greeks chose the geometrical con¬ 
cepts of point and line as the basis of their mathematics, it has 
become the modem guiding principle that all mathematical statements 
should be reducible ultimately to statements about the natural numbers, 
1, 2, 3, ••• . ^'God created the natural numbers; everything else is 
man^s handiwork.” In these words Leopold Kronecker (1823-1891) 
pointed out the safe ground on which the structure of mathematics can 
be built. 

Created by the human mind to count the objects in various assem¬ 
blages, numbers have no reference to the individual characteristics of 
the objects counted. The number six is an abstraction from all actual 
collections containing six things; it does not depend on any specific 
qualities of these things or on the symbols used. Only at a rather 
advanced stage of intellectual development does the abstract character 
of the idea of number become clear. To children, numbers always re¬ 
main connected with tangible objects such as fingers or beads, and primi¬ 
tive languages display a concrete number sense by providing different 
sets of number words for different types of objects. 

Fortunately, the mathematician as such need not be concerned with 
the philosophical nature of the transition from collections of concrete 
objects to the abstract number concept. We shall therefore accept the 
natural numbers as given, together with the two fundamental opera¬ 
tions, addition and multiplication, by which they may be combined. 

§1. CALCULATION WITH INTEGERS 

1. Laws of Arithmetic 

The mathematical theory of the natural numbers or positive integers 
is known as arithmetic. It is based on the fact that the addition and 



2 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


[11 


multiplication of integers are governed by certain laws. In order to 
state these laws in full generality we cannot use symbols like 1, 2, 3 
which refer to specific integers. The statement 

1 + 2 = 2 + 1 

is only a particular instance of the general law that the sum of two 
integers is the same regardless of the order in which they are considered. 
Hence, when we wish to express the fact that a certain relation between 
integers is valid irrespective of the values of the particular integers 
involved, we shall denote integers symbolically by letters a, b, c, • • • . 
With this agreement we may state five fundamental laws of arithmetic 
with which the reader is familiar: 

1) o + 6 ®= 6 + a, 2) oh = 6o, 

3) o + (6 + c) = (o + 6) + c, 4) a(bc) = (db)c, 

5) a(b -i- c) — ab + ac. 

The first two of these, the commutative laws of addition and multipli¬ 
cation, state that one may interchange the order of the elements involved 
in addition or multiplication. The third, the associative law of addition, 
states that addition of three numbers gives the same result whether we 
add to the first the sum of the second and third, or to the third the sum 
of the first and second. The fourth is the associative law of multiplica¬ 
tion. The last, the distributive law, expresses the fact that to multiply 
a sum by an integer we may multiply each term of the sum by this integer 
and then add the products. 

These laws of arithmetic are very simple, and may seem obvious. But 
they might not be applicable to entities other than integers. If o 
and b are symbols not for integers but for chemical substances, and 
if "addition” is used in a colloquial sense, it is evident that the commuta¬ 
tive law will not always hold. For example, if sulphuric acid is added to 
water, a dilute solution is obtained, while the edition of water to pure 
sulphuric acid may result in disaster to the experimenter. Similar illus¬ 
trations will show that in this type of chemical "arithmetic” the associa¬ 
tive and distributive laws of addition may also fail. Thus one can 
imagine types of arithmetic in which one or more of the laws l)-5) 
do not hold. Such systems have actually been studied in modern mathe¬ 
matics. 

A concrete model for the abstract concept of integer will indicate the 
intuitive basis on which the laws l)-5) rest. Instead of using the usual 
number symbols 2, 3, etc.^ let us denote the integer that gives the 



CALCXJLATION WITH INTEGERS 


3 


number of objects in a given collection (say the collection of apples on a 
particular tree) by a set of dots placed in a rectangular box, one dot for 
each object. By operating with these boxes we may investigate the laws 
of the arithmetic of integers. To add two integers a and b, we place the 
corresponding boxes end to end and remove the partition. 



Fig. 1. Addition. 


To multiply a and 6, we arrange the dots in the two boxes in rows, and 
form a new box with a rows and b columns of dots. The rules l)-5) 


i-- = 


Fig. 3. Multiplication. 

will now be seen to correspond to intuitively obvious properties of these 
operations with boxes. 


1 1 • • 1 4 - 1 • • • 

T71 \ - 

• • 


1 1**1 ^ 1 . * * * 


• • 



Fig. 3. The Distributive Law. 


On the basis of the definition of addition of two integers we may define 
the relation of inequality. Each of the equivalent statements, a < b 
(read, “a is less than 6’^ and b > a (read, *^b is greater than a”), means 
that box b may be obtained from box a by the addition of a properly 
chosen third box c, so that 6 = a + c. When this is so we write 

c = 6 — a, 

which defines the operation of subtraction. 


Fig. 4. Subtraction. 

Addition and subtraction are said to be inverse operations^ since if 
the addition of the integer d to the integer a is followed by the subtraction 
of the integer d, the result is the original integer a: 

(o + d) d =» 0. 















4 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


[11 


It should be noted that the integer b — a has been defined only when 
b > a. The interpretation of the symbol 6 — a as a negative integer 
when b < a will be discussed later (p. 54 et seq.). 

It is often convenient to use one of the notations, b > a (read, ^*6 is 
greater than or equal to or a < b (read, is less than or equal to 
b**), to express the denial of the statement, a > 6. Thus, 2 > 2, anJ 
3 > 2. 

We may slightly extend the domain of positive integers, represented 
by boxes of dots, by introducing the integer zerOy represented by a 
completely empty box. If we denote the empty box by the usual symbol 
0, then, according to our definition of addition and multiplication, 

a + 0 = a, 
a-0 = 0, 

for every integer a. For a + 0 denotes the addition of an empty box 
to the box a, while a-0 denotes a box with no columns; i.e. an empty 
box. It is then natural to extend the definition of subtraction by setting 

a -■ a = 0 

for every integer a. These are the characteristic arithmetical properties 
of zero. 

Geometrical models like these boxes of dots, such as the ancient 
abacus, were widely used for numerical calculations until late in the 
middle ages, when they were slowly displaced by greatly superior 
symbolic methods based on the decimal system. 

2. The Representation of Integers 

We must carefully distinguish between an integer and the symbol, 
5, V, • •. , etc., used to represent it. In the decimal system the ten 
digit symbols, 0, 1, 2, 3, • • • ,9, are used for zero and the first nine posi¬ 
tive integers. A larger integer, such as ‘^three hundred and seventy- 
two,can be expressed in the form 

300 + 70 + 2 = 3-10' + 7-10 + 2, 

and is denoted in the decimal system by the symbol 372. Here the 
important point is that the meaning of the digit symbols 3, 7, 2 depends 
on their position in the units, tens, or hundreds place. With this 
‘‘positional notation’^ we can represent any integer by using only the 
ten digit symbols in various combinations. The general rule is to express 
an integer in the form illustrated by 

2 = a . 10* + 6 • 10* + c . 10 + d, 



REPRESENTATION OF INTEGERS 


5 


where the digits a, 6, c, d are integers from zero to nine. The integer z 
is then represented by the abbreviated symbol 

abed. 

We note in passing that the coefficients d, c, b, a are the remainders left 
after successive divisions of z by 10. Thus 

10 )372 Remainder 
10)^ 2 
10)3 7 

0 3 

The particular expression given above for z can only represent integers 
less than ten thousand, since larger integers will require five or more digit 
symbols. If z is an integer between ten thousand and one hundred 
thousand, we can express it in the form 

z - a . 10* + 6 • 10* + c . 10* + d • 10 + e, 

and represent it by the symbol abode. A similar statement holds for 
integers between one hundred thousand and one million, etc. It is very 
useful to have a way of indicating the result in perfect generality by a 
single formula. We may do this if we denote the different coefficients, 
6, d, c, • • • , by the single letter a with different ‘ ^subscripts, oo, Ui, 
02 ,az f • • • , and indicate the fact that the powers of ten may be as large 
as necessary by denoting the highest power, not by 10® or 10^ as in the 
examples above, but by 10", where n is understood to stand for an arbi¬ 
trary integer. Then the general method for representing an integer z 
in the decimal system is to express z in the form 

(1) z = an • 10" + Un-i • 10""' + • • • + ai . 10 + oo, 

and to represent it by the symbol 

UnUn-lUn-2 • • • • 

As in the special case above, we see that the digits oo, ai, a*, •. • , Un 
are simply the successive remainders when z is divided repeatedly by 10. 

In the decimal system the number ten is singled out to serve as a base. 
The layman may not realize that the selection of ten is not essential, 
and that any integer greater than one would serve the same purpose. 
For example, a septimal system (base 7) could be used. In such a sys¬ 
tem, an integer would be expressed as 

(2) 6«.7" + 6.-i.7"-‘+ ••• + 61-7 + 6,, 



6 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


ll] 


where the b’s are digits from zero to six, and denoted by the symbol 

bnbn-l • • • bJ)o . 

Thus “one hundred and nine” would be denoted in the septimal system 
by the symbol 214, meaning 

2.7* + 1 . 7 + 4. 

As an exercise the reader may prove that the general rule for passing 
from the base ten to any other base B is to perform successive divisions 
of the number z by B; the remainders will be the digits of the number in 
the system with base B, For example: 

7)109 Remainder 
7)15 4 

7)2 1 

0 2 

109 (decimal system) = 214 (septimal system). 

It is natural to ask whether any particular choice of base would be most 
desirable^ We shall see that too small a base has disadvantages, while 
a large base requires the learning of many digit symbols, and an extended 
multiplication table. The choice of twelve as base has been advocated, 
since twelve is exactly divisible by two, three, four, and six, and, as a 
result, work involving division and fractions would often be simplified. 
To write any integer in terms of the base twelve (duodecimal system), 
we require two new digit symbols for ten and eleven. Let us write a 
for ten and for eleven. Then in the duodecimal system ' ^twelve 
would be written 10, *‘twenty-two'^ would be la, ‘^twenty-thr^e'^ would 
be 1ft and '^one hundred thirty-one'' would be aft 

The invention of positional notation, attributed to the Sumerians or 
Babylonians and developed by the Hindus, was of enormous significance 
for civilization. Early systems of numeration were based on a purely 
additive principle. In the Roman symbolism, for example, one wrote 

CXVIII = one hundred + ten + five + one + one + one. 

The Egyptian, Hebrew, and Greek systems of numeration were on the 
same level. One disadvantage of any purely additive notation is that 
more and more new symbols are needed as numbers get larger. (Of 
course, early scientists were not troubled by our modern astronomical 
or atomic magnitudes.) But the chief fault of ancient systems, such as 
the Roman, was that computation with numbers was so difficult that 
only the specialist could handle any but the simplest problems. It is 
quite different with the Hindu positional system now in use. This was 
introduced into medieval Europe by the merchants of Italy, who learned 



REPRESENTATION OF INTEGERS 


7 


it from the Moslems. The positional system has the agreeable property 
that all numbers, however large or small, can be represented by the use 
of a small set of different digit symbols (in the decimal system, these are 
the ^'Arabic numerals'' 0, 1, 2, • • • , 9). Along with this goes the more 
important advantage of ease of computation. The rules of reckoning 
with numbers represented in positional notation can be stated in the 
form of addition and multiplication tables for the digits that can be memo¬ 
rized once and for all. The ancient art of computation, once confined to a 
few adepts, is now taught in elementary school. There are not many 
instances where scientific progress has so deeply affected and facilitated 
everyday life. 

3. Computation in Systems Other than the Decimal 

The use of ten as a base goes back to the dawn of civilization, and if 
undoubtedly due to the fact that we have ten fingers on which to count. 
But the number words of many languages show remnants of the use of 
other bases, notably twelve and twenty. In English and German the 
words for 11 and 12 are not constructed on the decimal principle of com¬ 
bining 10 with the digits, as are the '^teens," but are linguistically inde¬ 
pendent of the words for 10. In French the words ‘ Vingt" and ‘‘quatre- 
vingt" for 20 and 80 suggest that for some purposes a system with base 
20 might have been used. In Danish the word for 70, **halvfirsinds- 
tyve," means half-way (from three times) to four times twenty. The 
Babylonian astronomers had a system of notation that was partly 
sexagesimal (base 60), and this is believed to account for the customary 
division of the hour and the angular degree into 60 minutes. 

In a system other than the decimal the rules of arithmetic are the same, 
but one must use different tables for the addition and multiplication of 
digits. Accustomed to the decimal system and tied to it by the number 
words of our language, we might at first find this a little confusing. Let 
us try an example of multiplication in the septimal system. Before 
proceeding, it is advisable to write down the tables we shall have to use: 


A ddition Multiplication 



1 

2 

3 

4 

6 

6 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

6 

6 

10 

1 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

10 

11 

2 

2 

4 

6 

11 

13 

15 

3 

4 

5 

6 

10 

11 

12 

3 

3 

6 

12 

15 

21 

24 

4 

5 

6 

10 

11 

12 

13 

4 

4 

11 

15 

22 

26 

33 

6 

6 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

6 

5 

13 

21 

26 

34 

42 

6 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

16 

6 

6 

15 

24 

33 

42 

51 



8 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


in 


Let us now multiply 265 by 24, where these number symbols are 
written in the septimal system. (In the decimal system this would be 
equivalent to multiplying 145 by 18.) The rules of multiplication are 
the same as in the decimal system. We begin by multiplying 5 by 4, 
which is 26, as the multiplication table shows. 

265 

24 

1456 

563 

10416 

We write down 6 in the units place, “carrying^’ the 2 to the next 
place. Then we find 4-6 = 33, and 33 + 2 = 35. We write down 5, 
and proceed in this way until everything has been multiplied out. Add¬ 
ing 1,456 + 5,630, we get 6 + 0 = 6 in the units place, 5 + 3 = 11 in 
the sevens place. Again we write down 1 and keep 1 for the forty- 
nines place, where we have 1 + 6 + 4 = 14. The final result is 
265.24 == 10,416. 

To check this result we may multiply the same numbers in the decimal 
system. 10,416 (septimal system) may be written in the decimal 
system by finding the powers of 7 up to the fourth: 7* = 49, 7* = 343, 
7^ = 2,401. Hence 10,416 = 2,401 + 4*49 + 7 + 6, this evaluation 
being in the decimal system. Adding these numbers we find that 10,416 
in the septimal system is equal to 2,610 in the decimal system. Now 
we multiply 145 by 18 in the decimal system; the result is 2,610, so 
the calculations check. 

Exercises: 1) Set up the addition and multiplication tables in the duodecimal 
system and work some examples of the same sort. 

2) Express ‘‘thirty” and “one hundred and thirty-three” in the systems with 
the bases 5, 7, 11, 12. 

8) What do the symbols 11111 and 21212 mean in these systems? 

4) Form the addition and multiplication tables for the bases 5, 11, 13. 

From a theoretical point of view, the positional system with the 
base 2 is singled out as the one with the smallest possible base. The 
only digits in this dyadic system are 0 and 1; every other number z 
is represented by a row of these symbols. The addition and multiplica¬ 
tion tables consist merely of the rules 1 + 1 = 10 and 1*1 == 1. But 
the disadvantage of this system is obvious: long expressions are needed 
to represent small numbers. Thus seventy-nine, which may be ex¬ 
pressed as 1*2® + 0*2® + 0*2® + 1*2® + 1-2* + 1*2 + 1, is written 
in the dyadic system as 1,001,111. 



COMPUTATION IN OTHER SYSTEMS 


9 


As an illustration of the simplicity of multiplication in the dyadic 
system, we shall multiply seven and five, which are respectively 111 
and 101. Bemembering that 1 + 1 = 10 in this system, we have 

111 

_m 

111 

111 

100011 = 2 * + 2 + 1 ^ 

which is thirty-five, as it should be. 

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646-1716), one of the greatest intellects 
of his time, was fond of the dyadic system. To quote Laplace: “Leib¬ 
niz saw in his binary arithmetic the image of creation. He imagined 
that Unity represented God, and zero the void; that the Supreme Being 
drew all beings from the void, just as unity and zero express all numbers 
in his system of numeration.” 

Exercise: Consider the question of representing integers with the base a. 
In order to name the integers in this system we need words for the digits 
0, 1, • • • , a — 1 and for the various powers of a: a, a*, a*, • • • . How many different 
number words are needed to name all numbers from zero to one thousand, for 
a = 2, 3, 4, 5, ••• , 16? Which base requires the fewest? (Examples: If 
a « 10, we need ten words for the digits, plus words for 10, 100, and 1000, making 
a total of 13. For a « 20, we need twenty words for the digits, plus words for 
20 and 400, making a total of 22. If a = 100, we need 100 plus 1.) 

♦§2. THE INFINITUDE OF THE NUMBER SYSTEM. 

MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 

1. The Principle of Mathematical Induction 

There is no end to the sequence of integers 1, 2, 3, 4, • • • ; for after 
any integer n has been reached we may write the next integer, n + 1. 
We express this property of the sequence of integers by saying that 
there are infinitely many integers. The sequence of integers represents 
the simplest and most natural example of the mathematical infinite, 
which plays a dominant r61e in modern mathematics. Everywhere in 
this book we shall have to deal with collections or ‘‘sets^^ containing 
infinitely many mathematical objects, like the set of all points on a line 
or the set of all triangles in a plane. The infinite sequence of integers 
is the simplest example of an infinite set. 

The step by step procedure of passing from n to n + 1 which generates 
the infinite sequence of integers also forms the basis of one of the most 
fundamental patterns of mathematical reasoning, the principle of 



10 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


[II 


mathematical induction. “Empirical induction” in the natural sciences 
proceeds from a particular series of observations of a certain phenomenon 
to the statement of a general law governing all occurrences of this 
phenomenon. The degree of certainty with which the law is thereby 
established depends on the number of single observations and confinnar 
tions. This sort of inductive reasoning is often entirely convincing; 
the prediction that the sun will rise tomorrow in the east is as certain 
as anything can be, but the character of this statement is not the same 
as that of a theorem proved by strict logical or mathematical reasoning. 

In quite a different way mathematical induction is used to establish 
the truth of a mathematical theorem for an infinite sequence of cases, 
the first, the second, the third, and so on without exception. Let us 
denote by A a statement that involves an arbitrary integer n. For 
example, A may be the statement, “The sum of the angles in a convex 
polygon of n + 2 sides is n times 180 degrees.” Or A' may be the as¬ 
sertion, “By drawing n lines in a plane we cannot divide the plane into 
more than 2" parts.” To prove such a theorem for every integer n it 
does not suffice to prove it separately for the first 10 or 100 or even 1000 
values of n. This indeed would correspond to the attitude of empirical 
induction. Instead, we must use a method of strictly mathematical 
and non-empirical reasoning whose character will be indicated by the 
following proofs for the special examples A and A'. In the case A, we 
know that for n = 1 the polygon is a triangle, and from elementary 
geometry the sum of the angles is known to be 1 • 180°. For a quadri¬ 
lateral, n =» 2, we draw a diagonal which divides the quadrilateral into 
two triangles. This shows immediately that the sum of the angles of 
the quadrilateral is equal to the sum of the angles in the two triangles, 
which yields 180° ■+• 180° = 2-180°. Proceeding to the case of a pen¬ 
tagon with 5 edges, n = 3, we decompose it into a triangle plus a quad¬ 
rilateral. Since the latter has the angle sum 2-180°, as we have just 
proved, and since the triangle has the angle sum 180°, we obtain 3-180 
degrees for the 5-gon. Now it is clear that we can proceed indefinitely 
in the same way, proving the theorem for » = 4, then for n = 5, and 
so on. Each statement follows in the same way from the preceding 
one, so that the general theorem A can be established for all n. 

Similarly we can prove the theorem A'. For n — 1 it is obviously 
true, since a single line divides the plane into 2 parts. Now add a 
second line. Each of the previous parts will be divided into two new 
parts, unless the new line is parallel to the first. In either case, for 



PRINCIPLE OF MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 


11 


n = 2 we have not more than 4 = 2^ parts. Now we add a third line. 
Each of the previous domains will either be cut into two parts or be 
left untouched. Thus the sum of parts is not greater than 2 ^ *2 = 2 *. 
Knowing this to be true, we can prove the next case in the same way, 
and so on indefinitely. 

The essential idea in the preceding arguments is to establish a 
general theorem A for all values of n by successively proving a sequence 
of special cases, Ai, A 2 , • • • . The possibility of doing this depends 
on two things: a) There is a general method for showing that if any 
statement A, is true then the next statement, Ar+i, will also be true, 
b) The first statement Ai is knotvn to be true. That these two condi¬ 
tions are suflScient to establish the truth of all the statements 
, i 42 , i4s, • • • is a logical principle which is as fundamental to mathe¬ 
matics as are the classical rules of Aristotelian logic. We formulate it 
as follows: 

Let us suppose that we wish to establish a whole infinite sequence of 
mathematical propositions 


Al y A2 , As f • • • 

which together constitute the general proposition A. Suppose that a) 
by some mathematical argument it is shown that if r is any integer and if 
the assertion Ar is known to be true then the truth of the assertion Ar+i will 
follow, and that b) the first proposition Ai is known to be true. Then all 
the propositions of the sequence must be true, and A is proved. 

We shall not hesitate to accept this, just as we accept the simple 
rules of ordinary logic, as a basic principle of mathematical reasoning. 
For we can establish the truth of every statement A„, starting from the 
given assertion b) that Ai is true, and proceeding by repeated use of 
the assertion a) to establish successively the truth of A 2 , As, A 4 , and 
so on until we reach the statement An . The principle of mathematical 
induction thus rests on the fact that after any integer r there is a next, 
r + 1 , and that any desired integer n may be reached by a finite number 
of such steps, starting from the integer 1 . 

Often the principle of mathematical induction is applied without 
explicit mention, or is simply indicated by a casual ^^etc.^’ or ‘^and so 
on.^’ This is especially frequent in elementary instruction. But the 
explicit use of an inductive argument is indispensable in more subtle 
proofs. We shall give a few illustrations of a simple but not quite 
trivial character. 



12 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


[1] 


2. The ArithmeUcal Progression 

For every value of n, the sum 1 + 2 + 3+ ••• + no/ the first n integers 
is equal to In order to prove this theorem by mathematical 

A 

induction we must show that for every n the assertion ^4*: 

(1) 1 + 2 + 3+♦..+n = 

is true, a) We observe that if r is an integer and if the statement Ar is 
known to be true, i.e. if it is known that 

1 + 2 + 3+ ... + r = '‘ ■ ^’^ -±1 ^ , 

then by adding the number (r + 1) to both sides of this equation we 
obtain the equation 

l + 2 + 3+ ...+r + (r + l)= + (r + 1) 

_ r(r + 1) + 2(r + 1) _ (r + l)(r + 2), 
2 2 

which is precisely the statement Ar+i . b) The statement Ai is ob- 
1 *2 

viously true, since 1 = . Hence, by the principle of mathematical 

induction, the statement is true for every n, as was to be proved. 

Ordinarily this is shown by writing the sum 1+2 + 3+ ••• + n 
in two forms: 

/S„ = l + 2+ ...+ (n — l) + n 

and 

Sk = 71+(n — l) + ... + 2 + l. 

On adding, we see that each pair of numbers in the same column yields 
the sum n + 1, and, since there are n columns in all, it follows that 

25, = n(n + 1), 


which proves the desired result. 



ARITHMETICAL PROGRESSION 


13 


From (1) we may immediately derive the formula for the sum of the 
first (n + I) terms of any arithmetical progression, 

(2) P, = a + (o + d) + (a + 2d) + • • • + (o + nd) = ^ 

For 

P» = (n + I)a + (I + 2 + • • • + n)d = (n + I)o + 

^ 2(w l)a H* n{Ti l)d __ (w l)(2a -|- nd) 

2 2 • 
For the case a = 0, d = 1, this is equivalent to (1). 


3. The Geometrical Progression 


One may treat the general geometrical progression in a similar way. 
We shall prove that for every value of n 

1 - 

(3) (3ft = a + ag + + • • • + aq^ = a - -. 

1 - ^ 


(We suppose that ? 5 ^ 1, since otherwise the right side of (3) has no 
meaning.) 

Certainly this assertion is true forn = 1, for then it states that 


Gi = a + oq — 


a(l ~ q^) ^ a(l + q){l - q) 

1 - g (1 - g) 


a(l + q). 


And if we assume that 

Gr“U“f“Og-4'**« -1“ 



9 


then we find as a consequence that 

Gr+i = (a + og + • • • + aq^) + og*^^^ = Gr + ~ ^ —h 


.(1 -+ Q^^\i -g)_ . 1 -g^^^ + g^^^ q^" 

l~g "" l~g 1-g ‘ 


But this is precisely the assertion (3) for the case n = r + 1. This 
completes the proof. 

In elementary textbooks the usual proof proceeds as follows. Set 
Gft = a + ag + • • • + oq^, 
and multiply both sides of this equation by g, obtaining 
gGft = og + ug* + • • • "b oq^^^* 



14 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


in 


Now subtract corresponding sides of this equation from the preceding 
equation, obtaining 

<?n — oGn = a — og""*’*, 

(l-g)G. = o(l-g"«), 



4. The Sum of the First n Squares 

A further interesting application of the principle of mathematical 
induction refers to the sum of the first n squares. By direct trial one 
finds that, at least for small values of n, 

(4) + 2^ + 3» + ... + + _ 1 _ ) ^ 

o 

and one might gitess that this remarkable formula is valid for all integers 
n. To prove this, we shall again use the principle of mathematical 
induction. We begin by observing that if the assertion An , which in 
this case is the equation (4), is true for the case n = r, so that 

1* + 2* + 3^ xi- ... + 

o 

then on adding (r + 1)* to both sides of this equation we obtain 

!■ + ? ++...+,■ +(, + l)* = + (, +!)■ 

D 

_ r(r + l)(2r + 1) + 6(r + 1)’ _ (r + l)[r(2r +1) + 6(r + 1)] 
6 6 

_ (r + l)(2r* + 7r + 6) _ (r + l)(r + 2)(2r + 3) 

6 6 

which is precisely the assertion Ar+i in this case, since it is obtained by 
substituting r + 1 for » in (4). To complete the proof we need only 
remark that the assertion Ai, in this case the equation 

_ 1(1 + 1)(2+1) 

1 g , 

is obviously true. Hence the equation (4) is true for every n. 



SUM OF FIRST n SQUARES 


15 


Formulas of a similar sort may be found for higher powers of the 
integers, 1* + 2* + 3* + • • • + n*, where k is any positive integer 
As an exercise, the reader may prove by mathematical induction that 

(5) 1‘ + 2* + 3* + ... + n‘ = 

It should be remarked that although the principle of mathematical 
induction suffices to 'prove the formula (5) once this formula has been 
written down, the proof gives no indication of how this formula was 
arrived at in the first place; why precisely the expression [n(n + l)/2]* 
should be guessed as an expression for the sum of the first n cubes, 
rather than [n(n + l)/3]* or (19n^ — 41n + 24)/2 or any of the in¬ 
finitely many expressions of a similar type that could have been con¬ 
sidered. The fact that the proof of a theorem consists in the applica¬ 
tion of certain simple rules of logic does not dispose of the creative 
element in mathematics, which lies in the choice of the possibilities to 
be examined. The question of the origin of the hypothesis (5) 
belongs to a domain in which no very general rules can be given; experi¬ 
ment, analogy, and constructive intuition play their part here. But 
once the correct hypothesis is formulated, the principle of mathematical 
induction is often sufficient to provide the proof. Inasmuch as such a 
proof does not give a clue to the act of discovery, it might more fittingly 
be called a verification, 

*5. An Important Inequality 

In a subsequent chapter we shall find use for the inequality 

(6) (1 + p)” > 1 + np, 

which holds for every number p > — 1 and positive integer n. (For 
the sake of generality we are anticipating here the use of negative and 
non-integral numbers by allowing p to be any number greater than —1. 
The proof for the general case is exactly the same as in the case where 
p is a positive integer.) Again we use mathematical induction. 

a) // it is true that (1 + p)’' > 1 + rp, then on multiplying both sides 
of this inequality by the positive number 1 + p, we obtain 

(1 + p)*'^^ > 1 + rp + P + rp*. 

Dropping the positive term rp* only strengthens this inequality, so that 
(1 + P)"*^^ > 1 + (r + l)p, 



16 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


in 


which shows that the inequality (6) will also hold for the next integer, 
r + 1. b) It is obviously true that (1 + p)‘ > 1 + p. This completes 
the proof that (6) is true for every n. The restriction to numbers p > — 1 
is essential. If p < — 1, then 1 + p is negative and the argument in 
a) breaks down, since if both members of an inequality are multiplied 
by a negative quantity, the sense of the inequality is reversed. (For 
example, if we multiply both sides of the inequality 3 > 2 by —1 we 
obtain —3 > —2, which is false.) 


*6. The Binomial Theorem 


Frequently it is important to have an explicit expression for the 
nth power of a binomial, (a + h)". We find by explicit calculation that 
for n = 1, (a + b)‘ = o +b, 

for n = 2, (o *1- 6)* = (a -1- b)(a "1“ b) ®= o(o b) b(o *1- b) 

= o* -f- 2ab b*, 

for n = 3, (o + b)* = (o + b)(o + b)* = o(a* + 2ab + b*) 

*4- b(a* *{■ 2<ib “b b*) = a* H- 3a*b -4- 3ab* •4- b*, 

and so on. What general law of formation lies behind the words “and 
so on”? Let us examine the process by which (a + b)’ was computed. 
Since (a + b)* =» (a + b)(a + b), we obtained the expression for (a + b)* 
by multiplying each term in the expression a + b by a, then by b, and 
adding. The same procedure was used to calculate (a + b)* = 
(a + b)(a + b)*. We may continue in the same way to calculate 
(a + b)*, (a + b)‘, and so on indefinitely. The expression for (a + b)" 
will be obtained by multiplying each term of the previously obtained 
expression for (a + b)"”* by a, then by b, and ad^ng. This leads to 
the following diagram: 


a + b = 
(o + b)*=. 
(a + b)* = 
(a + b)‘ = 


a + b 

X X / X 

a* + 2ab + b* 

X X X X X X 

a* + 3a’b + 3ab* + b* 

N. 

a* 4- 4a*b + 6a*b* + 4ab* + b* 


which gives at once the general rule for forming the coefiScients in the ex> 
pansion of (a + b)”. We construct a triangular array of numbers, 




THE BINOMIAL THEOREM 


17 


starting with the coefficients 1,1 of a + and such that each number of 
the triangle is the sum of the two numbers on each side of it in the 
preceding row. This array is known as Pascal's Triangle. 

1 1 

1 2 1 
13 3 1 

1 4 6 4 1 

1 5 10 10 5 1 

1 6 15 20 15 6 1 

1 7 21 35 35 21 7 1 


The nth row of this array gives the coeffleients in the expansion of (a + b)“ 
in descending powers of a and ascending powers of b; thus 

(a + hf = a' + 7a% + 21aV + 35oV + 35aV + 21oV + 7o6* + h\ 

Using a concise subscript and superscript notation we may denote the 
numbers in the nth row of Pascal’s Triangle by 

_ 1 /nrn /yn /yn _ -t 

Then the general formula for’ (a + by may be written 

(7) (a + by = a" + + • • • + CJ-iab"”' + b\ 

According to the law of formation of PascaFs Triangle, we have 

(8) c?-c?^x^ + cr^ 

As an exercise, the experienced reader may use this relation, together 
with the fact that Ci = C} = 1, to show by mathematical induction that 

nn _ Mn - l)(n - 2) ... (n - i + 1) _ nl 

i!(n~t)!‘ 

(For any positive integer n, the symbol nl (read, factoriarO de¬ 
notes the product of the first n integers: nl = l«2-3 • • • n. It is con¬ 
venient also to define 01 = 1, so that 9) is valid for t = 0 and i = n.) 
This explicit formula for the coefficients in the binomial expansion is 
sometimes called the binomial theorem, (See also p. 476.) 


Exercises: Prove by mathematical induction: 
. _1_ J_ I n 

' 1-2■^2.3''’ “* ■*‘n(n + l) ''n+ 1" 


2)2- + J + | + 



n +2 

2 » * 




18 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


fll 


•3) 1+ 25 + 35* + 


___ 1 - (n + 1)5« + n5"+ 

- -- irrjii - 


•4) (1 + 5)(1 + «•)(! + ?‘) •••(! + 5**) 


1-5* 

1-5 


Find the sum of the following geometrical progressions: 
11 1 

6 ) 


1 + (1 + **)* 

X *• 


(1 + a^)»' 


6 ) 1 + 


1 + »» (! + *»)» 


(1 + x*)"’ 


7) - V* \ . . A* - V*V 

^*.+ V**^V** + V*; '^\x* + y^J • 

Using formulas (4) and (5) prove: 

3 

•9) 1* + 3*+ ••• + (2n + 1)» - (n + l)*(2n* + 4n + 1). 

10) Prove the same results directly by mathematical induction. 


*7. Further Remarks on Mathematical Induction 

The principle of mathematical induction may be generalized slightly to read: 
**l{ a sequence of statements A ,, Ag+i, A.+i, • • • is given, where s is some positive 
integer, and if 

a) For every value of r ^ the truth of -dr+i will follow from the truth of Af, 
and 

b) At is known to be true, 

then all the statements At , At^i , At+i ••• are true; that is to say, il» is true 
for all n ^ Precisely the same reasoning used to establish the truth of the 
ordinary principle of mathematical induction applies here, with the sequence 
1, 2, 3, • • • replaced by the similar sequence 8, 8 + 1, « + 2, « + 3 • • • . By using 
the principle in this form we can strengthen somewhat the inequality on page 15 
by eliminating the possibility of the ***** sign. We state: For every p 5*^ 0 and 
> —1 and every integer n ^ 2, 

(10) (1 + p)»* > 1 + np. 

The proof will be left to the reader. 

Closely related to the principle of mathematical induction is the ''principle 
of the smallest integer** which states that every non-empty set C of positive integers 
has a smallest member, A set is empty if it has no members, e.g., the set of 
straight circles or the set of integers n such that n > n. For obvious reasons 
we exclude such sets in the statement of the principle. The set Cmay be finite, 
like the set 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, or infinite, like the set of all even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 
10, • • • . Any non-empty set C must contain at least one integer, say n, and 
the smallest of the integers 1, 2, 8, • • • , n that belongs to C will be the smallest 
integer in C. 

The only way to realize the significance of this principle is to observe that it 



REMARKS ON MATHEMATICAL INDUCTION 


19 


does not apply to every set C of numbers that are not integers; for example, 
the set of positive fractions 1, §, * * • does not contain a smallest member. 

From the point of view of logic it is interesting to observe that the princi¬ 
ple of the smallest integer may be used to prove the principle of mathematical in¬ 
duction as a theorem. To this end, let us consider any sequence of statements 
At t At f At y ••• such that 

a) For any positive integer r the truth of Ar+i will follow from that of Af. 

b) Ai is known to be true. 

We shall show the hypothesis that any one of the A’s is false to be untenable. 
For if even one of the A*s were false, the set C of all positive integers n for which 
An is false would be non-empty. By the principle of the smallest integer, C 
would contain a smallest integer, p, which must be > 1 because of b). Hence A, 
would be false, but Ap_i true. This contradicts a).. 

Once more we emphasize that the principle of mathematical induction 
is quite distinct from empirical induction in the natural sciences. 
The confirmation of a general law in any finite number of cases, no matter 
how large, cannot provide a proof for the law in the rigorous mathemat¬ 
ical sense of the word, even if no exception is known at the time. Such 
a law would remain only a very reasonable hypothesisy subject to modi¬ 
fication by the results of future experience. In mathematics, a law or a 
theorem is proved only if it can be shown to be a necessary logical 
consequence of certain assumptions which are accepted as valid. There 
are many examples of mathematical statements which have been veri¬ 
fied in every particular case considered thus far, but which have not 
yet been proved to hold in general (for an example see p. 30). One 
may suspect that a theorem is true in all generality by observing its 
truth in a number of examples; one may then attempt to prove it by 
mathematical induction. If the attempt succeeds the theorem is 
proved to be true; if the attempt fails, the theorem may be true or false 
and may some day be proved or disproved by other methods. 

In using the principle of mathematical induction one must always be sure that 
the conditions a) and b) are really satisfied. Neglect of this precaution may 
lead to absurdities like the following, in which the reader is invited to discover 
the fallacy. We snail ^ ‘prove’ ’ that any two positive integers are equal ; for example, 
that 6 » 10. 

First a definition: If a and b are two unequal positive integers, we define 
max (a, b) to be a or 6, whichever is greater; if a *■ 6 we set max (a, 5) *■ a «» 6. 
Thus max (3, 6) ■* max (5, 3) 5, while max (4, 4) =* 4. Now let A» be the state¬ 

ment, “If a and b are any two positive integers such that max (a, b) ■» n, then 
a - 6.“ 



20 


THE NATURAL NUMBERS 


[I] 


a) Suppose A r to be true. Let a and 5 be any two positive integers such that 
max (a, 6) >■ r + 1. Consider the two integers 

« a — 1 

/J - h - 1; 

then max (ck, fi) ■> r. Hence a 0, for we are assuming Ar to be true. It follows 
that a a b; hence Ar^i is true. 

b) AI is obviously true, for if max (a, b) — 1, then since a and b are by hypothe¬ 
sis positive integers they must both be equal to 1. Therefore, by mathematical 
induction. An is true for every n. 

Now if a and b are any two positive integers whatsoever, denote max (a, b) by r. 
Since An has been shown to be true for every n, in particular Ar is true. Hence 
a — b. 



SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER I 

THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 

INTRODUCTION 

The integers have gradually lost their association with superstition 
and mysticism, but their interest for mathematicians has never waned. 
Euclid (circa 300 B.C.), whose fame rests on the portion of his Elements 
that forms the foundatioiT of geometry studied in high school, seems to 
have made original contributions to number theory, while his geometry 
was largely a compilation of previous results. Diophantus of Alex¬ 
andria (circa 275 A.D.), an early algebraist, left his mark on the theory 
of numbers. Pierre de Fermat (1601-1665), a jurist of Toulouse, and 
one of the greatest mathematicians of his time, initiated the modern 
work in this field. Euler (1707-1783), the most prolific of mathemati¬ 
cians, included much number-theoretical work in his researches. Names 
prominent in the annals of mathematics—Legendre, Dirichlet, Riemann 
—can be added to the list. Gauss (1777-1855), the foremost mathe¬ 
matician of modern times, who devoted himself to many different 
branches of mathematics, is said to have expressed his opinion of num¬ 
ber theory in the remark, ^‘Mathematics is the queen of the sciences 
and the theory of numbers is the queen of mathematics.^' 

§l.vTHE PRIME NUMBERS 

1. Fundamental Facts 

Most statements in number theory, as in mathematics as a whole, 
are concerned not with a single object—the number-5 or the number 
32—but with a whole class of objects that have some common prop¬ 
erty, such as the class of all even integers, 

2, 4, 6, 8, • • • , 
or the class of all integers divisible by 3, 

3, 6, 9, 12,..., 

or the class of all squares of integers, 

1, 4, 9, 16, , 

and so on. 



22 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


[II 


Of fundamental importance in number theory is the class of all 
primes. Most integers can be resolved into smaller factors: 10 = 2*5, 
111 = 3-37, 144 = 3*3'2*2*2<2, etc. Numbers that cannot be so 
resolved are known as prime numbers or primes. More precisely, a 
prime is an integer p, greater than one, which has no factors other than 
itself and one. (An integer a is said to be a factor or divisor of an integer b 
if there is some integer c such that h — ac.) The numbers 2, 3, 5, 7, 
11,13,17, .. • are primes, while 12, for example, is not, since 12 = 3-4. 
The importance of the class of primes is due to the fact that every 
integer can be expressed as a product of primes', if a number is not itself 
a prime, it may be successively factored until all the factors are primes; 
thus 360 = 3 120 = 3 30.4 = 3-3.10.2.2 = 3.3.5.2.2.2 = 2*3*.5. 
An integer (other than 0 or 1) which is not a prime is said to be 
composite. 

One of the first questions that arises concerning the class of primes is 
whether there is only a finite number of different primes or whether 
the class of primes contains infinitely many members, like the class of 
all integers, of which it forms a part. The answer is; There are in¬ 
finitely many primes. 

The proof of the infinitude of the class of primes as given by Euclid 
remains a model of mathematical reasoning. It proceeds by the 
“indirect method”. We start with the tentative assumption that the 
theorem is false. This means that there would be only a finite number 
of primes, perhaps very many—a billion or so—or, expressed in a general 
and non-committal way, n. Using the subscript notation we may de¬ 
note these primes by pi, Pi, ,Pn. Any other number will be 

composite, and must be divisible by at least one of the primes 
Pi, P» I Pn- We now produce a contradiction by constructing a 
number A which differs from every one of the primes Pi, Ps, • • • , Pn 
because it is larger than any of them, and which nevertheless is not 
divisible by any of them. This number is 

A = PiP* . • • Pn + 1, 

i.e. 1 plus the product of what we supposed to be all the primes. A is 
larger than any of the p’s and hence must be composite. But A divided 
by Pi or by p*, etc., always leaves the remainder 1; therefore A has none 
of the p’s as a divisor. Since our initial assumption that there is only 
a finite number of primes leads to this contradiction, the assumption is 
seen to be absurd, and hence its contrary must be true. This proves 
the theorem. 



FUNDAMENTAL FACTS 


23 


Although this proof is indirect, it can easily be modified to give a method for 
constructing, at least in theory, an infinite sequence of primes. Starting with 
any prime number, such as pi ■» 2, suppose we have found n primes pi , Pj i ••• iPn\ 
we then observe that the number pipi • • • pn+1 either is itself a prime or contains 
as a factor a prime which differs from those already found. Since this factor can 
always be found by direct trial, we are sure in any case to find at least one new 
prime pn+i ; proceeding in this way we see that the sequence of constructible 
primes can never encT. 

Exercise: Carry out this construction starting with pi 2, ps — 3 and find 
6 more primes. 

When a number has been expressed as a product of primes, we may 
arrange these prime factors in any order. A little experience shows that, 
except for this arbitrariness in the order, the decomposition of a number 
N into primes is unique: Every integer N greater than 1 can he factored 
into a product of primes in only one way. This statement seems at first 
sight to be so obvious that the layman is very much inclined to take 
it for granted. But it is by no means a triviality, and the proof, though 
perfectly elementary, requires some subtle reasoning. The classical 
proof given by Euclid of this 'fundamental theorem of arithmetic'' is 
based on a method or "algorithm" for finding the greatest common 
divisor of two numbers. This will be discussed on page 44. Here we 
shall give instead a proof of more recent vintage, somewhat shorter 
and perhaps more sophisticated than Euclid's. It is a typical example 
of an indirect proof. We shall assume the existence of an integer 
capable of two essentially different prime decompositions, and from this 
assumption derive a contradiction. This contradiction will show that 
the hypothesis that there exists an integer with two essentially different 
prime decompositions is untenable, and hence that the prime decomposi¬ 
tion of every integer is unique. 

*If there exists a positive integer capable of decomposition into two 
essentially different products of primes, there will be a smallest such 
integer (see p. 18), 

(1) m = pipa • • • Pr = M 2 • • • g., 

where the p's and g^'s are primes. By rearranging the order of the p's 

and g's if necessary, we may suppose that 

Pi ^ Pa ^ ^ Pr I Qi ^ Q2 ^ ^ Q» • 

Now Pi cannot be equal to qi , for if it were we could cancel the first 
factor from each side of equation (1) and obtain two essentially different 
prime decompositions of an integer smaller than m, contradicting the 
choice of m as the smallest integer for which this is possible. Hence 



24 


THE THEORY OP NUMBERS 


HI 


either pi < gi or 31 < pi. Suppose pi < 31 . (If 31 < Pi we simply 
interchange the letters p and 3 in what follows.) We form the integer 

( 2 ) m’ - m - (piQtqt • • • 3 ,). 

By substituting for m the two expressions of equation ( 1 ) we may write 
the integer m' in either of the two forms 

(3) m' « (pipt • • • Pr) — (pi3» • • • 3 .) = Pi(P»Pi • • • Pr — 3*?* • • • ?•) 

(4) m' = (3 i3j ... q.) - (p^qt ... q,) = (31 - Pi)(q»qz ••• q,) 

Since Pi < 31 , it follows from (4) that m' is a positive integer, while from 
( 2 ) it follows that m' is smaller than m. Hence the prime decomposi¬ 
tion of m' must be unique, aside from the order of the factors. But 
from (3) it appears that the prime pi is a factor of m', hence from (4) 
Pi must appear as a factor of either (31 — pi) or (gigj • • • 3 ,). (This 
follows from the assumed uniqueness of the prime decomposition of m'; 
see the reasoning in the next paragraph.) The latter is impossible, 
since all the 3 ’s are larger than pi. Hence pi must be a factor of 3 i — pi, 
so that for some integer h, 

Qi-Pi- Pi'h or 31 = pi{h + 1). 

But this shows that pi is a factor of 31 , contrary to the fact that 31 is 
a prime. This contradiction shows our initial assumption to be unten¬ 
able and hence completes the proof of the fundamental theorem of 
arithmetic. 

An important corollary of the fundamental theorem is the following: 
If a prime p ia a factor of the product ab, then p must be a factor of either 
a or b. For if p were a factor of neither a nor h, then the product 
of the prime decompositions of a and b would yield a prime decomposi¬ 
tion of the integer ab not containing p. On the other hand, since p is 
assumed to be a factor of oh, there exists an integer t such that 

ab = pt. 

Hence the product of p by a prime decomposition of t would yield a prime 
decomposition of the. integer ab containing p, contrary to the fact that 
the prime decomposition of ab is unique. 

Examples: If one has verified the fact that 13 is a factor of 2652, and 
the fact that 2652 = 6 >442, one may conclude that 13 is a factor of 442. 
On the other hand, 6 is a factor of 240, and 240 = 15-16, but 6 is not a 
factor of either 15 or 16. This shows that the assumption that p is 
prime is an easential one. 



FUNDAMENTAL FACTS 


25 


Exereite: In order to find all the divisors of any number a we need only decom* 
pose a into a product 


•P?', 


where the p’s are distinct primes, each raised to a certain power. All the divisors 
of a are the numbers 


6 - p^*.p^>... p<*', 


where the /3*s are any integers satisfying the inequalities 

0 < /3i < ai , 0 < /5, < a,, ••• , 0 < /3r < ar . 


Prove this statement. As a consequence, show that the number of different 
divisors of a (including the divisors a and 1) is given by the product 


For example, 


(ai + l)(a2 + 1) ••• (ar + 1). 


144 - 

has 5*3 divisors. They are 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 9, 18, 36, 72, 144. 


2. The Distribution of the Primes 

A list of all the primes up to any given integer N may be constructed 
by writing down in order all the integers less than iV, striking out all 
those which are multiples of 2, then all those remaining which are 
multiples of 3, and so on until all composite numbers have been elimi¬ 
nated. This process, known as the ‘‘sieve of Eratosthenes,’^ will catch 
in its meshes the primes up to N, Complete tables of primes up to 
about 10,000,000 have gradually been computed by refinements of this 
method, and they provide us with a tremendous mass of empirical data 
concerning the distribution and properties of the primes. On the basis 
of these tables we can make many highly plausible conjectures (as 
though number theory were an experimental science) which are often 
extremely diflScult to prove. 

a. Formulas Producing Primes 

Attempts have been made to find simple arithmetical formulas that 
yield only primes, even though they may not give all of them. Fermat 
made the famous conjecture (but not the definite assertion) that all 
numbers of the form 


F(n) - / + 1 



26 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


II] 


are primes. Indeed, for n » 1, 2, 3, 4 we obtain 

F(l) = 2* + 1 == 6, 

F{2) = 2*’ + 1 = 2* + 1 = 17, 

F(3) = 2** + 1 = 2* + 1 = 257, 

F(4) = 2** + 1 = 2“ + 1 = 65,537, 

all primes. But in 1732 Euler discovered the factorization 2*‘ + 1 = 
641 -6,700,417; hence F(6) is not a prime. Later, more of these *Termat 
numbers^' were found to be composite, deeper number-theoretical 
methods being required in each case because of the insurmountable 
difficulty of direct trial. To date it has not even been proved that 
any of the numbers F(n) is a prime for n > 4. 

Another remarkable and simple expression which produces many 
primes is 

f(n) = — n + 41. 

For n = 1, 2, 3, • • • , 40, f(n) is a prime; but for n = 41, we have 
f(n) = 41^, which is no longer a prime. 

The expression 

n* - 79n + 1601 


yields primes for all n up to 79, but fails when n = 80. On the whole, 
it has been a futile task to seek expressions of a simple type which 
produce only primes. Even less promising is the attempt to find an 
algebraic formula which shall yield all the primes. 


6. Primes in Arithmetical Progressions 

While it was simple to prove that there are infinitely many primes in 
the sequence of all integers, 1, 2, 3, 4, • • • , the step to sequences such as 
1, 4, 7, 10, 13, - - • or 3, 7, 11, 15, 19, • • • or, more generally, to any 
arithmetical progression, a, a + d, a + 2(i, • • - a + ’wi, • • •, where a and d 
have no common factor, was much more difficult. All observations 
pointed to the fact that in each such progression there are infinitely 
many primes^ just as in the simplest one, 1, 2, 3, • • • . It required an 
enormous effort to prove this general theorem. Lejeune Dirichlet 
(1805-1859), one of the leading mathematicians of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury, obtained full success by applying the most advanced tools of 
mathematical analysis then known. His original papers on the subject 
rank even now among the outstanding achievements in mathematics, 
and after a hundred years the proof has not yet been simplified enough 
to be within the reach of students who are not well trained in the 
technique of the calculus and of function theory. 



PRIMES IN ARITHMETICAL PROGRESSIONS 


27 


Although we cannot attempt to prove Dirichlet^s general theorem, 
it is easy to generalize Euclid^s proof of the infinitude of primes to cover 
some special arithmetical progressions such as 4n + 3 and fin + 5. To 
treat the first of these, we observe that any prime greater than 2 is 
odd (since otherwise it would be divisible by 2 ) and hence is of the form 
4n + 1 or 4n + 3, for some integer n. Furthermore, the product of 
two numbers of the form 4n + 1 is again of that form, since 

(4a + 1)(46 + 1) = Ifiab + 4a + 46 + 1 = 4(4a6 + a + 6 ) + 1. 

Now suppose there were but a finite number of primes, pi, Pi, ••• Pm 
of the form 4n + 3, and consider the number 

N = Mpijh . . • Pn) - 1 = 4(pi . . . Pn ~ 1) + 3. 

Either N is itself a prime, or it may be decomposed into a product of 
primes, none of which can be pi, • • • , Pn , since these divide N with a 
remainder — 1 . Furthermore, all the prime factors of N cannot be of 
the form 4n + 1 , for N is not of that form and, as we have seen, the 
product of numbers of the form 4n + 1 is again of that form. Hence 
at least one prime factor must be of the form 4n + 3, which is impossible, 
since we saw that none of the p’s, which we supposed to be all the primes 
of the form 4n + 3, can be a factor of N. Therefore the assumption 
that the number of primes of the form 4n + 3 is finite has led to a 
contradiction, and hence the number of such primes must be infi¬ 
nite. 

Exercise: Prove the corresponding theorem for the progression 6n + 6. 
c. The Prime Number Theorem 

In the search for a law governing the distribution of the primes, the 
decisive step was taken when mathematicians gave up futile attempts 
to find a simple mathematical formula yielding all the primes or giving 
the exact number of primes contained among the first n integers, and 
sought instead for information concerning the average distribution of 
the primes among the integers. 

For any integer n let us denote by An the number of primes among 
the integers 1 , 2 , 3, • • • , n. If we underline the primes in the sequence 
consisting of the first few integers: 12345fi789 10 ni2 13 14 15 
Ifi 17 18 19 • • • we can compute the first few values of An : 

Ai = 0, A 2 = 1 , Aa = A 4 = 2 , As = Ae = 3, A? = As = Ag = Aw = 4, 
All == An = 6, Ais = Ai4 = Ai6 = Am = fi, An = Am = 7, Am = 8, etc. 



28 


THE THEORY OP NUMBERS 


[I] 


If we now take any sequence of values for n which increases without 
limit, say 

n = 10,10*, 10*, 10*, ..., 
then the corresponding values of An, 

Alt , ■'4.10*, Alt* , -dio*, • • • , 

will also increase without limit (although more slowly). For we know 
that there are infinitely many primes, so the values of .4„ will sooner 
or later exceed any finite number. The “density” of the primes among 
the first n integers is given by the ratio An/n, and from a table of primes 
the values of An/n may be computed empirically for fairly large values 
of n. 


n 

An/n 

10* 

0.168 

10* 

0.078498 

10* 

• • • 

0.050847478 


The last entry in this table may be regarded as giving the probability 
that an integer picked at random from among the first 10* integers will 
be a prime, since there are 10* possible choices, of which 4io« are 
primes. 

The distribution of the individual primes among the integers is ex¬ 
tremely irregular. But this irregularity “in the small” disappears if 
we fix our attention on the average distribution of the primes as given 
by the ratio An/n. The simple law that governs the be.havior of 
this ratio is one of the most remarkable discoveries in the whole of 
mathematics. In order to state the prime number theorem we must 
define the “natural logarithm” of an integer n. To do this we take two 
perpendicular axes in a plane, and consider the locus of all points in 
the plane the product of whose distances x and y from these axes is 
equal to one. In terms of the codrdinates x and y this locus, an equilat¬ 
eral hyperbola, is defined by the equation xy = \. We now define log 
n to be the area in Figure 5 bounded by the hyperbola, the i-axis, and 
the two vertical lines a: = 1 and x — n. (A more detailed discussion of 
the logarithm will be found in Chapter VIII.) From an empirical study 
of prime number tables Gauss observed that the ratio AJn is approxi¬ 
mately equal to 1/log n, and that this approximation appears to improve 




THE PRIME NUMBER THEOREM 


29 


as n increases. The goodness of the approximation is given by the 

A J Yi 

ratio -jp -—, whose values for n = 1000, 1,000,000, 1,000,000,000 are 
1/log n 

shown in the following table. 


n 

AJn 

1/logn 

An/n 

1/logn 

10* 

0.168 

0.145 

1.159 

10* 

0.078498 

0.072382 

1.084 

10* 

0.050847478 

0.048254942 

1.053 

y\ 


I 1 n * 

Fig. 6. The area of the shaded region under the hyperbola defines log n. 



On the basis of such empirical evidence Gauss made the conjecture that 
the ratio An/n is ^^asymptotically equal^^ to 1/log n. By this is meant 
that if we take a sequence of larger and larger values of n, say n equal to 

10 , 10 ", 10 ", 10 ^ •.. 

as before, then the ratio of AJn to 1/log n, 

AJn 
1/log n ’ 

calculated for these successive values of n, will become more and more 
nearly equal to 1, and that the difference of this ratio from 1 can be 
made as small as we please by confining ourselves to sufficiently large 
values of n. This assertion is symbolically expressed by the sign 

An 1 An!^ X j X < • 

— ^- means — tends to 1 as n increases, 

n logn 1/log n 

That cannot be replaced by the ordinary sign = of equality is clear 
from the fact that while An ia always an integer, n/log n is not. 






30 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


HI 


That the average behavior of the prime number distribution can be 
described by the logarithmic function is a very remarkable discovery, 
for it is surprising that two mathematical concepts which seem so un¬ 
related should be in fact so intimately connected. 

Although the statement of Gauss’s conjecture is simple to understand, 
a rigorous mathematical proof was far beyond the powers of mathemati¬ 
cal science in Gauss’s time. To prove this theorem, concerned only with 
the most elementary concepts, it is necessary to employ the most 
powerful methods of modern mathematics. It took almost a hundred 
years before analysis was developed to the point where Hadamard 
(1896) in Paris and de la Vall4e Poussin (1896) in Louvain could give 
a complete proof of the prime number theorem. Simplifications and 
important modifications were given by v. Mangoldt and Landau. 
Long before Hadamard, decisive pioneering work had been done by Rie- 
mann (1826-1866) in a famous paper where the strategic lines for the 
attack were drawn. Recently, the American mathematician Norbert 
Wiener was able to modify the proof so as to avoid the use of complex 
numbers at an important step of the reasoning. But the proof of the 
prime number theorem is still no easy matter even for an advanced 
student. We shall return to this subject on page 482 et seq. 

d. Two Unsolved Problems Concerning Prime Numbers 

While the problem of the average distribution of primes has been 
satisfactorily solved, there are many other conjectures which are sup¬ 
ported by all the empirical evidence but which have not yet been proved 
to be true. 

One of these is the famous Goldbach conjecture, Goldbach (1690- 
1764) has no significance in the history of mathematics except for this 
problem, which he proposed in 1742 in a letter to Euler. He observed 
that for every case he tried, any even number (except 2, which is itself 
a prime) could be represented as the sum of two primes. For example: 

4 = 2-t-2, 6 = 3 + 3, 8 = 5 + 3, 10-5 + 5, 12 = 5 +7, 14 = 
7 + 7, 16 = 13 + 3, 18 = 11 + 7, 20 = 13 + 7, ... , 48 = 29 + 19, 
... , 100 = 97 + 3, etc. 

Goldbach asked if Euler could prove this to be true for all even num¬ 
bers, or if he could find an example disproving it. Euler never provided 
an answer, nor has one been given since. The empirical evidence in 
favor of the statement that every even number can be so represented 
is thoroughly convincing, as anyone can verify by trying a number of 
examples. The source of the diflSculty is that primes are defined in 
terms of mnUiplication^ while the problem involves addition. Generally 



UNSOLVED PROBLEMS CONCERNING PRIME NUMBERS 31 


speaking, it is difficult to establish connections between the multi¬ 
plicative and the additive properties of integers. 

Until recently, a proof of Goldbach's conjecture seemed completely 
inaccessible. Today a solution no longer seems out of reach. An 
important success, very unexpected and startling to all experts, was 
achieved in 1931 by a then unknown young Russian mathematician, 
Schnirelmann (1905-1938), who proved that every positive integer can 
he represented as the sum of not more than SOOfiOO primes. Though this 
result seems ludicrous in comparison with the original goal of proving 
Goldbach^s conjecture, nevertheless it was a first step in that direction. 
The proof is a direct, constructive one, although it does not provide any 
practical method for finding the prime decomposition of an arbitrary 
integer. More recently, the Russian mathematician Vinogradoff, 
using methods due to Hardy, Littlewood and their great Indian col¬ 
laborator Ramanujan, has succeeded in reducing the number from 
300,000 to 4. This is much nearer to a solution of Goldbach^s problem. 
But there is a striking difference between Schnirelmann^s result and 
Vinogradoff's; more significant, perhaps, than the difference between 
300,000 and 4, Vinogradoff’s theorem was proved only for all ^‘suffi¬ 
ciently large^^ integers; more precisely, Vinogradoff proved that there 
exists an integer N such that any integer n > N can be represented as 
the sum of at most 4 primes. Vinogradoff's proof does not permit us 
to appraise N] in contrast to Schnirelmann’s theorem it is essentially 
indirect and non-constructive. What Vinogradoff really proved is 
that the assumption that infinitely many integers cannot be decomposed 
into at most 4 prime summands leads to an absurdity. Here we have 
a good example of the profound difference between the two types of 
proof, direct and indirect. (See the general discussion on p. 86.) 

The following even more striking problem than Goldbach's has come 
nowhere near a solution. It has been observed that primes frequently 
occur in pairs of the form p and p + 2. Such are 3 and 5, 11 and 13, 
29 and 31, etc. The statement that there are infinitely many such pairs 
is believed to be correct, but as yet not the slightest definite step has 
been taken towards a proof. 

§2. CONGRUENCES 
1. General Concepts 

Whenever the question of the divisibility of integers by a fixed integer 
d occurs, the concept and the notation of “congruence’* (due to Gauss) 
serves to clarify and simplify the reasoning. 



32 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


lU 


To introduce this concept let us examine the remainders left when 
integers are divided by the number 6. We have 


0 = 0.5 + 0 

7 = 1.5 + 2 

— 1 = 

-1.5 + 4 

1 = 0.5+ 1 

8 = 1.5 + 3 

-2 = 

-1.5 + 3 

2 = 0.5 + 2 

9 = 1.5 + 4 

-3 = 

-1.5 + 2 

3 = 0.5 + 3 

10 = 2.5 + 0 

-4 = 

-1.5 + 1 

4 -= 0.5 + 4 

11 = 2.5 + 1 

-5 = 

-1.5 + 0 

5 = 1.5 + 0 

12 = 2.5 + 2 

-6 = 

-2.5 + 4 

6 = 1.5 + 1 

etc. 

etc. 



We observe that the remainder left when any integer is divided by 5 is 
one of the five integers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. We say that two integers a and b 
are “congruent modulo 6” if they leave the same remainder on division 
by 6. Thus 2, 7, 12, 17, 22, ... , -3, -8, -13, -18, ... are all 
congruent modulo 5, since they leave the remainder 2. In general, we 
eay that two integers a and b are congruent modulo d, where d is a fixed 
integer, if a and b leave the same remainder on division by d, i.e., if 
there is an integer n such that a — b = nd. For example, 27 and 15 are 
congruent modulo 4, since 

27 = 6.4 + 3, 15 = 3.4 + 3. 

The concept of congruence is so useful that it is desirable to have a 
brief notation for it. We write 

a = b (mod d) 

to express the fact that a and b are congruent modulo d. If there is 
no doubt concerning the modulus, the “mod d” of the formula may be 
omitted. (If a is not congruent to b modulo d, we shall write a ^ b 
(mod d).) 

Congruences occur frequently in daily life. For example, the hands 
on a clock indicate the hour modulo 12, and the mileage indicator on a 
car gives the total miles traveled modulo 100,000. 

Before proceeding with the detailed discussion of congruences the 
reader should observe that the following statements are all equivalent: 

1. a is congruent to b modulo d. 

2. a 5 4- nd for some integer n. 

3. d divides a — b. 

The usefulness of Gauss’s congruence notation lies in the fact that 
congruence with respect to a fixed modulus has many of the formal 



GENERAL CONCEPTS 


33 


properties of ordinary equality. The most important formal properties 
of the relation a = b axe the following: 

1) Always a ^ a. 

2 ) If o = b, then 6 = 0 . 

3) If 0 = 6 and 6 = c, then a = c. 

Moreover, if o = a' and b = b', then 

4) o + 6 = o' + 

5) o - 6 = o' - 6'. 

6 ) 06 = o'6'. 

These properties remain true when the relation o = 6 is replaced by the 
congruence relation o s 6 (mod d). Thus 

1 ') Always a = a (mod d). 

2') If a = b (mod d) then 6 s a (mod d). 

3') If a = b (mod d) and b = c (mod d), then a = c (mod d). 

The trivial verification of these facts is left to the reader. 

Moreover, if o s o' (mod d) and b s b' (mod d), then 

4') o + 6 s o' + 6 ' (mod d). 

5') a — b = a' — b' (mod d). 

6 ') ab 3 o' 6 ' (mod d). 

Thus congruences with respect to the same modulus may be added, sub¬ 
tracted, and multiplied. To prove these three statements we need only 
observe that if 

o = o' + rd, 6 = 6 ' + «d, 

then 

o -J" 6 = o' H” 6' -b (r -f- s)d, 

a — b — a' — b' + (r — s)d, 

o 6 = o' 6 ' + (o's + b'r + rsd)d, 

from which the desired conclusions follow. 

The concept of congruence has an illuminating geometrical inter¬ 
pretation. Usually, if we wish to represent the integers geometrically, 
we choose a segment of unit length and extend it by multiples of its 
own length in both directions. In this way we can find a point on the 
line corresponding to each integer, as in Figure 6 . But when we are 
dealing with the integers modulo d, any two congruent numbers are con¬ 
sidered the same as far as their behavior on division by a is concerned, 



34 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


(II 


since they leave the same remainder. In order to show this geometri¬ 
cally, we use a circle divided into d equal parts. Any integer when 
divided by d leaves as remainder one of the d numbers 0, 1, • • • ,d — 1, 
which are placed at equal intervals on the circumference of the circle. 
Every integer is congruent modulo d to one of these numbers, and hence 
is represented geometrically by one of these points; two numbers are 
congruent if they are represented by the same point. Figure 7 is drawn 
for the case d = 6. The face of a clock is another illustration from 
daily life. 

------ ^ -----•— 

-3-2-10 1 2 3 

Fig. 0. Geometrical repreeentation of the integers. 

-4 -5 



Fig. 7. Geometrical representation of the integers modulo 9. 

As an example of the use of the multiplicative property 6') of con¬ 
gruences we may determine the remainders left when successive powers 
of 10 are divided by a given number. For example, 

lOs-1 (mod 11), 

since 10 = —1 -f 11. Successively multiplying this congruence by 
itself, we obtain 

(mod 11), 

ti 

I 

.etc. 


10* a (-!)(-!) = 1 

10* H -1 

10* a 1 


it 



GENERAL CONCEPTS 


35 


From this we can show that any integer 

Z = do "t" ffll* 10 *t* Oj* 10* ■)“••• "I" On" 10", 

expressed in the decimal system, leaves the same remainder on division 
by 11 as does the sum of its digits, taken with alternating signs, 

t = da — di dt — •••• 


For we may write 

z — ^=sct^•ll-^- aj(10* — 1) "I” Oj(10* -{■ 1) “I" < 14 ( 10 * — 1) 4- • • • . 

Since all the numbere 11,10* — 1,10* + 1, • • • are congruent to 0 modulo 
11, a — < is also, and therefore z leaves the same remainder on division 
by 11 as does t. It follows in particular that a number is divisible by 11 
(i.e. leaves the remainder 0) if and only if the alternating sum of its digits 
is divisible by 11. For example, since 3 — 1+ 6 — 2 + 8 — 1 + 9 = 
22, the number z = 3162819 is divisible by 11. To find a rule for 
divisibility by 3 or 9 is even simpler, since 10 s 1 (mod 3 or 9), and 
therefore 10" s 1 (mod 3 or 9) for any n. It follows that a number z 
is divisible by 3 or 9 if and only if the sum of its digits 

s = Oo + (ii + <x* + ••• +<ii, 

is likewise divisible by 3 or 9, respectively. 

For congruences modulo 7 we have 

10 s 3 , 10* = 2, 10* = -1, 10* = -3, 10* s -2, 10* 3 1. 

The successive remainders then repeat. Thus z is divisible by 7 if and 
only if the expression 

r = Oo 4 “ 3ai + 2 a 2 — (Zj —• 804 — 2 a 6 + + 807 + • • • 

is divisible by 7. 

Exercise: Find a similar rule for divisibility by 13. 

In adding or multiplying congruences with respect to a fixed modulus, 
say d = 5, we may keep the numbers involved from getting too large 
by always replacing any number a by the number from the set 


0, 1, 2, 8, 4 



86 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


II] 


to which it is congruent. Thus, in order to calculate sums and products 
of integers modulo 5, we need only use the following addition and 
multiplication tables. 


0 + 6 

6 B 0 1 2 3 4 


a B 0 0 1 2 3 4 

1 1 2 3 4 0 

2 2 3 4 0 1 

3 3 4 0 1 2 

4 4 0 1 2 3 


o<6 

6 B 0 1 2 3 4 

obO 00000 

1 0 12 3 4 

2 0 2 4 1 3 

3 0 3 1 4 2 

4 0 4 3 2 1 


From the second of these tables it appears that a product a6 is con¬ 
gruent to 0 (mod 5) only if o or 6 is b 0 (mod 5). This suggests the 
general law 

7) o6 B 0 (mod d) only if either a b 0 or 6 b 0 (mod d), 

which is an extension of the ordinary law for integers which states that 
o6 = 0 only if a = 0 or 6 = 0. The law 7) holds only when the modulus d 
is a prime. For the congruence 

a6 B 0 (mod d) 

means that d divides ab, and we have seen that a prime d divides a 
product a6 only if it divides a or 6; that is, only if 

o SB 0 (mod d) or 6 = 0 (mod d). 

If d is not a prime the law need not hold; for we can write d = r«s, 
where r and s are less than d, so that 

r 0 (mod d), « ^ 0 (mod d), 

but 


rs = d B 0 (mod d). 

For example, 2 0 (mod 6) and 3^0 (mod 6), but 2*3 = 6 = 0 

(mod 6). 

Exercise: Show that the following law of cancellation holds for con¬ 
gruences with respect to a prime modulus: 

If a6 B oc and a ^ 0, then 6 b c. 

Exercises: 1) To what number between 0 and 6 inclusive is the product 11-IS* 
2322-13-19 congruent modulo 7? 



GENERAL CONCEPTS 


37 


2) To what number between 0 and 12 inclusive is 3-7‘ll-17-19'23-29-113 
congruent modulo 13? 

3) To what number between 0 and 4 inclusive is the sum 1 + 2 + 2* + • • • + 2‘* 
congruent modulo 6? 

2. Fermat’s Theorem 

In the seventeenth century, Fermat, the founder of modem number 
theory, discovered a most important theorem: If p ia any prime which 
does not divide the integer a, then 

s 1 (mod p). 

This means that the (p — l)st power of o leaves the remainder 1 upon 
division by p. 

Some of our previous calculations confirm this theorem; for example, 
we found that 10* s 1 (mod 7), 10* = 1 (mod 3), and 10*® = 1 
(mod 11). Likewise we may show that 2** s 1 (mod 13) and 5*® = 1 
(mod 11). To check the latter congruences we need not actually cal¬ 
culate such high powers, since we may take advantage of the multi¬ 
plicative property of congruences: 

2* = 16 = 3 (mod 13), 

2* = 9 3 -4 “ , 

2" 3 -4.3 = -12 ss 1 “ . 

6’® s 3-4 = 12 a 1 “ . 

To prove Fermat’s theorem, we consider the multiples of o 

wii = a, mz = 2a, mj = 3o, • • • , ntp-i = (p — l)o. 

No two of these integers can be congruent modulo p, for then p would 
be a factor of m, — m, = (r — s)a for some pair of integers r, s with 
1 < r < s < (p — 1). But the law 7) shows that this cannot occur; 
for since s — r is less than p, p is not a factor of « — r, while by assump¬ 
tion p is not a factor of a. Likewise, none of these numbers can be 
congruent to 0. Therefore the numbers mi, nit, • • • , mp_i must be 
respectively congruent to the numbers 1, 2, 3, • • • , p — 1, in some 
arrangement. It follows that 

minii... mp_i = 1.2.3 • • • (p — l)o’’“‘ a 1.2.3 ... (p — 1) (mod p), 
or, if for brevity we write K for 1.2.3 ... (p — 1), 

K{a*~^ - 1) a 0 (mod p). 


6* a 3 (mod 11), 

6* a 9 a -2 “ , 

6® a 4 “ , 



38 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


HI 


But K is not divisible by p, since none of its factors is; hence by the 
law 7), — 1) must be divisible by p, i.e. 

— 1 s 0 (mod p). 

This is Fermat’s theorem. 

To check the theorem once more, let us take p = 23 and a = 5. 
We then have, all modulo 23, 6* s 2, 5^ = 4, 5® = 16 = —7, 5^® s 
49 s 3, 5^® = 12, 5®^ = 24 s 1 . With a = 4 instead of 5, we get, 
again modulo 23, 4^ s -7, 4* s -28 s -5, 4® s -20 s 3, 4® s 9, 
4'' s -45 s 1, 4'^ s 1. 

In the example above with a = 4, p = 23, and in others, we ob¬ 
serve that not only the (p — l)st power of a, but also a smaller power 
may be congruent to 1. It is always true that the smallest such power, 
in this case 11, is a divisor of p — 1. (See the following Exercise 3.) 

Exercises: l) Show by similar computation that 2® si (mod 17); 3® s —1 (mod 
17); 31 * s -1 (mod 29); 2i* s -1 (mod 29); 4^* s 1 (mod 29); 6'^ 1 (mod 29). 

2 ) Check Fermat’s theorem for p = 5, 7, 11, 17, and 23 with different values 
of a. 

3 ) Prove the general theorem: The smallest positive integer c for which a* » 1 
(mod p) must be a divisor of p — 1. (Hint: Divide p — 1 by e, obtaining 

p — 1 « fee 4* r, 

where 0 < r < c, and use the fact that ■§ a* ■■ 1 (mod p).) 

3. Quadratic Residues 

Referring to the examples for Fermat’s theorem, we find that not 
only is = 1 (mod p) always, but (if p is a prime different from 2, 
therefore odd and of the form p = 2p' + 1) that for some values of a, 
= 1 (mod p). This fact suggests a chain of interesting 
investigations. We may write the theorem in the following form: 

— 1 = — 1 = (a*"' ~ l)(a’'' + 1) s 0 (mod p). 

Since a product is divisible by p only if one of the factors is, it appears 
immediately that either a*"' — 1 or a*"' + 1 must be divisible by p, so 
that for any prime p > 2 and any number a not divisible by p, either 

or (mod p). 

From the beginning of modern number theory mathematicians have 
been interested in finding out for what numbers a we have the first 
case and for what numbers the second. Suppose a is congruent modulo 
p to the square of some number x, 

a s (mod p). 



QUADRATIC RESIDUES 


39 


Then s which according to Fermat’s theorem is congruent 

to 1 modulo p. A number a, not a multiple of p, which is congruent 
modulo p to the square of some number is called a quadratic residue of p, 
while a number 6, not a multiple of p, which is not congruent to any 
square is called a quadratic non-residue of p. We have just seen that 
every quadratic residue a of p satisfies the congruence = 1 

(mod p). Without serious difficulty it can be proved that for every 
non-residue h we have the congruence = —1 (mod p). More¬ 

over, we shall presently show that among the numbers 1, 2, 3, • • • , p — l 
there are exactly (p — l)/2 quadratic residues and (p — l)/2 non¬ 
residues. 

Although much empirical data could be gathered by direct computa¬ 
tion, it was not easy at first to discover general laws governing the 
distribution of quadratic residues and non-residues. The first deep- 
lying property of these residues was observed by Legendre (1752-1833), 
and later called by Gauss the Law of Quadratic Reciprocity, This 
law concerns the behavior of two different primes p and g, and states 
that ^ is a quadratic residue of p if and only if p is a quadratic residue of g, 


provided that the product 




In case this 


product is odd, the situation is reversed, so that p is a residue of q if 
and only if g is a non-residue of p. One of the achievements of the 
young Gauss was to give the first rigorous proof of this remarkable 
theorem, which had long been a challenge to mathematicians. Gauss’s 
first proof was by no means simple, and the reciprocity law is not too 
easy to establish even today, although a great many different proofs 
have been published. Its true significance has come to light only re¬ 
cently in connection with modem developments in algebraic number 
theory. 

As an example illustrating the distribution of quadratic residues, let 
us choose p = 7. Then, since 


0* so, 1* s 1, 2* = 4, 3* s 2, 4* = 2, 5* s 4, 6* s 1, 


all modulo 7, and since the remaining squares repeat this sequence, the 
quadratic residues of 7 are the numbers congruent to 1, 2, or 4, while 
the non-residues are congruent to 3, 5, or 6. In the general case, the 
quadratic residues of p consist of the numbers congruent to 1^, 
• • • , (p — 1)^. But these are congment in pairs, for 

s (p — x)^ (mod p) (e.g., 2^ = 6^ (mod 7)), 



40 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


til 


since (p — *)* = p* — 2px + **&** (mod p). Hence half the num¬ 
bers 1, 2, • • • , p — 1 are quadratic residues of p and half are quadratic 
non-residues. 

To illustrate the quadratic reciprocity law, let us choose p = 6, 
q = 11. Since 11 a 1* (mod 5), 11 is a quadratic residue (mod 5); 
since the product [(6 — 1)/2][(11 — l)/2] is even, the reciprocity law 
tells us that 5 is a quadratic residue (mod 11). In confirmation of this, 
we observe that 5 s 4* (mod 11). On the other band, if p = 7, g = 11, 
the product [(7 — 1)/2][(11 — l)/2] is odd, and indeed 11 is a residue 
(mod 7) (since 11 s 2* (mod 7)), while 7 is a non-residue (mod 11). 

Exercises: 1. 6* ~ 36 « 13 (mod 23). Is 23 a quadratic residue (mod 13)7 

2 . We have seen that a? • (p — »)• (mod p). Show that these are the only 
congruences among the numbers 1*, 2*, 3*, ••• , (p — !>’. 

§3. PYTHAGOREAN NUMBERS AND FERMAT’S 
LAST THEOREM 

An interesting question in number theory is connected with the 
Pythagorean theorem. The Greeks knew that a triangle with sides 
3, 4, 5 is a right triangle. This suggests the general question: What 
other right triangles have sides whose lengths are integral multiples of 
a unit length? The Pythagorean theorem is expressed algebraically by 
the equation 

(1) a* -h = c\ 

where a and b are the lengths of the legs of a right triangle and c is the 
length of the hypotenuse. The problem of finding aU right triangles 
with sides of integral length is thus equivalent to the problem of finding 
all integer solutions (a, b, c) of equation (1). Any such triple of numbers 
is called a Pythagorean number triple. 

The problem of finding all Pythagorean number triples can be solved 
very simply. If a, h and c form a Pythagorean number triple, so that 
a* + b* = then we put, for abbreviation, a/c = bfc = i/. x and y 
are rational numbers for which a;* + y* = 1. We then have y^ = 
(1 — a;)(l + x)y or y/(l + x) = (1 — x)/y. The common value of the 
two sides of this equation is a number t which is expressible as the 
quotient of two integers, u/v. We can now write y = <(1 + x) and 
(1 — x) = ty, or 

tx — y = —t, X + ty 1. 

From these simultaneous equations we find immediately that 

I - f 2t 

* ! + <»’ l + £^' 



PYTHAGOREAN NUMBERS 


41 


Substituting for x, y and t, we have 

a ^ V? 6 _ 2uv 

c w* + c + 

Therefore 

a = (v* — u*)r, 

(2) h = (2uv)r, 

c = (u* + v*)r, 

for some rational factor of proportionality r. This shows that if (a, 6, c) 
is a Pythagorean number triple, then a, 6, c are proportional to — w*, 
2wt;, u* + respectively. Conversely, it is easy to see that any triple 
(a, 6, c) defined by (2) is a Pythagorean triple, for from (2) we obtain 

a* = (w* - 2wV + v)r^, 

6* = (4uV)r^ 

(? = (u* + 2wV + v^)r^y 

so that a* + 6* = c*. 

This result may be simplified somewhat. From any Pythagorean 
number triple (a, 6, c) we may derive infinitely many other Pythagorean 
triples (sa, sb, sc) for any positive integer s. Thus, from (3, 4, 6) we 
obtain (6, 8, 10), (9, 12, 15), etc. Such triples are not essentially dis¬ 
tinct, since they correspond to similar right triangles. We shall there¬ 
fore define a primitive Pythagorean number triple to be one where a, 
6, and c have no common factor. It can then be shown that the formulas 

a = v* — u*, 

h = 2uv, 

c = u* + r*, 

for any positive integers u and v with v > u, where u and v have no com¬ 
mon factor and are not both odd, yield oil primitive Pythagorean number 
triples. 

*Bzercue: Prove the last statement. 

As examples of primitive Pythagorean number triples we have n = 2, 
= 1: (3, 4, 5), w = 3, t; = 2: (5, 12, 13), u = 4, y = 3: (7, 24, 25), • • • , 
w = 10, y = 7: (51, 140, 149), etc. 



42 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


[I] 


This result concerning Pythagorean numbers naturally raises the 
question as to whether integers a, b, c can be found for which a* + 6* = 
c* or or, in general, whether, for a given positive integral 

exponent n > 2, the equation 

(3) a" + 6" = c" 

can be solved with positive integers a, b, c. An answer was provided 
by Fermat in a spectacular way. Fermat had studied the work of 
Diophantus, the ancient contributor to number theory, and was accus¬ 
tomed to making comments in the margin of his copy. Although he 
stated many theorems there without bothering to give proofs, all of 
them have subsequently been proved, with but one significant exception. 
While commenting on Pythagorean numbers, Fermat stated that 
the equation (3) is not solvable in integers for any n > 2, but that the 
elegant proof which he had found was unfortunately too long for the 
margin in which he was writing. 

Fermat^s general statement has never been proved true or false, 
despite the efforts of some of the greatest mathematicians since his 
time. The theorem has indeed been proved for many values of n, in 
particular, for all n < 619, but not for all n, although no counter¬ 
example has ever been produced. Although the theorem itself is not 
so important mathematically, attempts to prove it have given rise to 
many important investigations in number theory. The problem has 
also aroused much interest in non-mathematical circles, due in part to a 
prize of 100,000 marks offered to the person who should first give a 
solution and held in trust at the Royal Academy at Gottingen. Until 
the post-war German inflation wiped out the monetary value of this 
prize, a great number of incorrect ^'solutions'' was presented each year 
to the trustees. Even serious mathematicians sometimes deceived 
themselves into handing in or publishing proofs which collapsed after 
some superficial mistake was discovered. General interest in the ques¬ 
tion seems to have abated since the devaluation of the mark, .though from 
time to time there is an announcement in the press that the problem has 
been solved by some hitherto unknown genius. 

§4. THE EUCLIDEAN ALGORITHM 

1. General Theory 

The reader is familiar with the ordinary process of long division of one 
integer a by another integer b and knows that the process can be carried 



GENERAL THEORY 


43 


out until the remainder is smaller than the divisor. Thus if o = 648 
and 6 = 7 we have a quotient q = 92 and a remainder r = 4. 

92 

71648 648 = 7-92 + 4. 

18 

U 

4 

We may state this as a general theorem: If a is any integer and b is 
any integer greater than 0, then we can always find an integer q such that 

(1) a = 6-g + r, 

where r is an integer satisfying the inequality 0 < r < b. 

To prove this statement without making use of the process of long division we 
need only observe that any integer a is either itself a multiple of 6, 

a = bq, 

or lies between two successive multiples of fe, 

6g < a < 6(9 + 1) » + 6. 

In the first case the equation (1) holds with r = 0. In the second case we have, 
from the first of the inequalities above, 

a - 6g = r > 0, 

while from the second inequality we have 

a - 6g = r < 5, 

BO that 0 < r < 6 as required by (l). 

From this simple fact we shall deduce a variety of important conse¬ 
quences. The first of these is a method for finding the greatest common 
divisor of two integers. 

Let a and b be any two integers, not both equal to 0, and consider the 
set of all positive integers which divide both a and 6. This set is cer¬ 
tainly finite, since if a, for example, is ^ 0, then no integer greater in 
magnitude than a can be a divisor of o, to say nothing of b. Hence 
there can be but a finite number of common divisors of a and 6, and of 
these let d be the greatest. The integer d is called the greatest common 
divisor of a and 6, and written d = (a, 6). Thus for a = 8 and 6 = 12 
we find by direct trial that (8, 12) = 4, while for a = 5 and 6 = 9 we 
find that (5,9) = 1. When a and b are large, say a = 1804 and b = 328, 
the attempt to find (a. b) by trial and error would be quite wearisome. 



44 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


[I] 


A short and certain method is provided by the Euclidean algorithm. 
(An algorithm is a systematic method for computation.) It is based 
on the fact that from any relation of the form 

( 2 ) o = 6.3 + r 
it follows that 

(3) (a, b) = (6, r). 

For any number u which divides both a and b, 

a = su, b = tu, 

also divides r, since r = a — bq — su — qtu== (a — qt)u ; and con¬ 
versely, every number v which divides b and r, 

b — s'v, r = t'v, 

also divides a, since a = 63 + r = s'vq -f t'v = («'3 4 - t')v. Hence 
every common divisor of a and 6 is at the same time a common divisor 
of b and r, and conversely. Since, therefore, the set of aU common 
divisors of a and b is identical with the set of all common divisors of b 
and r, the greatest common divisor of a and b must be equal to the 
greatest common divisor of b and r, which establishes (3). The useful¬ 
ness of this relation will be seen immediately. 

Let us return to the question of finding the greatest common divisor 
of 1804 and 328. By ordinary long division 

_5 

32811804 
1640 
164 

we find that 

1804 = 5-328 + 164. 

Hence from (3) we conclude that 

(1804, 328) = (328, 164). 

Observe that the problem of finding (1804, 328) has been replaced by a 
problem involving smaller numbers. We may continue the process. 
Since 

2 

164 


0, 



GENERAL THEORY 


45 


we have 328 = 2-164 + 0, so that (328,164) = (164,0) = 164. Hence 
(1804, 328) = (328, 164) = (164, 0) = 164, which is the desired result. 

This process for finding the greatest common divisor of two numbers 
is given in a geometric form in Euclid's Elements, For arbitrary integers 
a and 6, not both 0, it may be described arithmetically in the following 
terms. 

We may suppose that 6 0, since (a, 0) = a. Then by successive 

division we can write 

(0 < ri < h) 
(0 < r 2 < ri) 
(0 < ra < rj) 

(0 < r4 < rs) 


so long as the remainders ri , r 2 , ra, • • * are not 0. From an inspection 
of the inequalities at the right, we see that the successive remainders 
form a steadily decreasing sequence of positive numbers: 

(5) 6 > ri > ra > ra > ri > • • • > 0. 

Hence after at most b steps (often many fewer, since the difference 
between two successive r's is usually greater than 1) the remainder 0 must 
appear: 

rn—2 ~ + r„ 

rn-1 = rn^n+l + 0. 

When this occurs we know that 

(a, h) = rn ; 

in other words, (a, b) is the last positive remainder in the sequence (6). 
This follows from successive application of the equality (3) to the eq¬ 
uations (4), since from successive lines of (4) we have 

(a, b) = (6, ri), (6, ri) = (n , ra), (ri, ra) = (ra, rs), 

(ra, ra) = (r, , ri), • • • , (rn-i, rn) == (rn , 0) = rn . 

Exercise: Carry out the Euclidean algorithm for finding the greatest common 
divisor of (a) 187, 77. (b) 106, 385. (c) 245, 193. 

An extremely important property of (a, b) can be derived from equa¬ 
tions (4). // d = (a, b), then positive or negative integers k and 1 can be 


(4) 


a = bqi + ri 

b = riqt + rt 

ri - rtqs -f- r, 

rj = rsqi + rt 





46 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


[I] 


found such that 

(6) d — ka -f- lb. 

To show this, let us consider the sequence (5) of successive remainders. 
From the first equation in (4) 

fi = o - qj), 

so that ri can be written in the form kia + hb (in this case ki = 1, 
k = —ffi). From the next equation, 

r» = 6 — qiti = b — qt(kia + kb) 

= (—qiki)a + (1 — qili)b = k2a + kb. 

Clearly this process can be repeated through the successive remainders 
rt,u, •. • until we arrive at a representation 

r„ = Affl + lb, 

as was to be proved. 

As an example, consider the Euclidean algorithm for finding (61, 24); 
the greatest common divisor is 1 and the desired representation for 1 
can be computed from the equations 

61 = 2.24 + 13, 24 = 1.13 + 11, 13 = Ml + 2, 

11 = 5.2+1, 2 = 2.1 + 0. 

We have from the first of these equations 

13 = 61 - 2.24, 

from the second, 

11 = 24 - 13 = 24 - (61 - 2.24) = -61 + 3.24, 
from the third, 

2 = 13 - 11 = (61 - 2.24) - (-61 + 3.24) = 2 61 - 5.24, 
and from the fourth, 

1 = 11 - 5.2 = (-61 + 3.24) - 5(2.61 - 5.24) = -11.61 + 28.24. 

2. Application to the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic 

The fact that d = (a, b) can always be written in the form d = 
ka + lb may be used to give a proof of the fundamental theorem of 
arithmetic that is independent of the proof given on page 23. First 
we shall prove, as a lemma, the corollary of page 24, and then from this 
lemma we shall deduce the fundamental theorem, thus reversing the 
previous order of proof. 



FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ARITHMETIC 


47 


Lemma: If a prime p divides a product ab, then p must divide a or b. 
If a prime p does not divide the integer a, then (a, p) = 1, since the 
only divisors of p are p and 1. Hence we can find integers k and I 
such that 

1 = ka + Ip. 

Multiplying both sides of this equation by b we obtain 

b = kab + Ipb. 

Now if p divides ab we can write 

ab = pr, 

so that 


b = kpr + Ipb = p(kr + lb). 

from which it is evident that p divides 6. Thus we have shown that if 
p divides ab but does not divide a then it must divide b, so that in any 
event p must divide a or 6 if it divides ab. 

The extension to products of more than two integers is immediate. 
For example, if p divides abc, then by twice applying the lemma we can 
show that p must divide at least one of the integers a, 6, and c. For if 
p divides neither a, 6, nor c, then it cannot divide ab and hence cannot 
divide (ab)c = abc. 

Exercise: The extension of this argument to products of any number n of 
integers requires the explicit or implicit use of the principle of mathematical in¬ 
duction. Supply the details of this argument. 

From this i:esult the fundamental theorem of arithmetic follows at 
once. Let us suppose given any two decompositions of a positive in¬ 
teger N intO'primes: 

N = P1P2 • • • Pr = gig 2 • • • g.. 

Since pi divides the left side of this equation, it must also divide,the 
right, and hence, by the previous exercise, must divide one of the 
factors qk • But g* is a prime, therefore pi must be equal to this g*. 
After these equal factors have been cancelled from the equation, it 
follows that P 2 must divide one of the remaining factors g<, and hence 
must be equal to it. Striking out p 2 and qt , we proceed similarly with 
P 3 , • • • , Pr. At the end of this process all the p’s will be cancelled, 
leaving only 1 on the left side. No q can remain on the right side, 
since all the g’s are larger than one. Hence the p’s and g’s will be 



48 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


in 


paired ofif into equal couples, which proves that, except perhaps for the 
order of the factors, the two decompositions were identical. 

3. Euler’sFunction. Fermat’s Theorem Again 

Two integers a and b are said to be relatively prime if their greatest 
common divisor is 1: 

(a, b) = 1. 

For example, 24 and 35 are relatively prime, while 12 and 18 are not. 
If & and b are relatively prime, then for suitably chosen positive or negative 
integers k and 1 we can write 

ka-hlb = 1. 

This follows from the property of (o, b) stated on page 45. 

Exercise: Prove the theorem: If an integer r divides a product ab and is relatively 
prime to a, then r must divide b. (Hint: if r is relatively prime to a then we can 
find integers k and I such that 

fcr + Zo ■■ 1. 

Multiply both sides of this equation by h.) This theorem includes the lemma 
of page 40 as a special case, since a prime p is relatively prime to an integer h if 
and only if p does not divide a. 

For any positive integer n, let denote the number of integers from 
1 to n which are relatively prime to n. This function ^(n), first intro¬ 
duced by Euler, is a “number-theoretical function” of great importance. 
The values of ^(n) for the first few values of n are easily computed: 


v»(l) = 1 

since 

1 is relatively prime to 1, 

*>(2) = 1 

since 

1 is relatively prime to 2, 

viZ) = 2 

since 

1 and 2 are relatively prime to 3, 

^(4) = 2 

since 

1 and 3 are relatively prime to 4, 

<P(5) = 4 

u 

1, 2, 3, 4 are relatively prime to 5, 

V>(6) = 2 

it 

1,5 “ “ “ “ 6, 

V>(7) - 6 

u 

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 are relatively prime to 7, 

^(8) - 4 

u 

1,3,5,7 “ “ “ “ 8, 

<»(9) “ 6 

i€ 

1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8 “ “ “ “ 9, 

^.(10) - 4 

it 

1,3,7,9 “ “ « “ 10, 


etc. 


We observe that <p(p) “p — lifpisa prime; for a prime p has no 
divisors other than itself and 1, and hence it is relatively prime to all 



EULER’S <(> FUNCTION 


49 


of the integers 1, 2, 3, • • • , p — 1. If » is composite, with prime 
decomposition 

n = pf'Pi’ •••??', 

where the p’s represent distinct primes, each raised to a certain power, 
then 

For example, since 12 = 2^ *3, 

^(12) = 12(1 - m - J) = 12(J)(f) = 4, 

as it should be. The proof is quite elementary, but will be omitted here. 

• Exercise: Using Euler’s ip function, generalize Fermat’s theorem of page 37. 
The general theorem states; If ty is any integer, and a is relatively prime to n, then 

m 1 (mod n). 

4. Continued Fractions. Diophantine Equations 

The Euclidean algorithm for finding the greatest common divisor of 
two integers leads immediately to an important method for representing 
the quotient of two integers as a composite fraction. 

Applied to the numbers 840 and 611, for example, the Euclidean 
algorithm yields the series of equations, 

840 = 1.611 + 229, 611 = 2.229 + 153, 

229 = 1.153 + 76, 153 = 2.76 + 1, 

which show, incidentally, that (840, 611) = 1. From these equations 
we may derive the following expressions: 


840 

611 



1 

611/229’ 


= _L_ 

229 229 229/153’ 


m 

153 



1 

153/76’ 


153 

76 




60 


THE THEORY OF NUMBERS 


III 


On combining these equations we obtain the development of the rational 
number in the form 


611 


1 + 


2 + 


1 + 


2 + 


76* 


An expression of the form 
(7) a = ao + 


Oi + 


0 * + 



where the o’s are positive integers, is called a continued fraction. The 
Euclidean algorithm gives us a method for expressing any rational 
number in this form. 


Exercise: Find the continued fraction developments ol 

2 ^ ^ 

6 ' 30 ^ 70 * 

• Continued fractions are of great importance in the branch of higher arith¬ 
metic known as Diophantine analysis. A Diophantine equatio'n is an alge¬ 
braic equation in one or more unknowns with integer coefficients, for which integer 
solutions are sought. Such an equation may have no solutions, a finite number, 
or an infinite number of solutions. The simplest case is the linear Diophantine 
equation in two unknowns, 

(8) ax -f - c, 

where a, h, and c are given integers, and integer solutions x, y are desired. The 
complete solution of an equation of this form may be found by the Euclidean 
algorithm. 

To begin with, let us find d = (a, 5) by the Euclidean algorithm; then for 
proper choice of the integers k and I, 

(9) aifc + « d. 

Hence the equation (8) has the particular solution k,y •• I tor the case c >■ d. 
More generally, if c is any multiple of d: 

c - <!•}, 



DIOPHANTINE EQUATIONS 


51 


then from (9) we obtain 

a{kq) + h{lq) ^ dq ^ c, 

so that (8) has the particular solution x « x* « y =» 2 /* ■* Iq, Conversely, 
if (8) has any solution x, y for a given c, then c must be a multiple of d — (a, b); 
for d divides both a and b, and hence must divide c. We have therefore proved 
that the equation (8) has a solution if and only if c is a multiple of (a, b). 

To determine the other solutions of (8) we observe that if x « x', y « y' is 
any solution other than the one, x = x*, y = y*, found above by the Euclidean 
algorithm, then x « x' — x*, y = y' — y* is a solution of the *‘homogeneous’- 
equation 

(10) ax + by ^ 0. 

For if 

ox' + 6y' — c and ox* + by* *» c, 
then on subtracting the second equation from the first we find that 
a(x' - X*) -b b(y' - y*) « 0. 

Now the most general solution of the equation (10) is x =* rb/(o, b), y =■ —ro/(o, 6), 
where r is any integer. (We leave the proof as an exercise. Hint: Divide by 
(o, 6) and use the Exercise on page 48.) It follows immediately that 

X =* X* + rb/(o, 6), y - y* - ro/(o, b). 

To summarize: The linear Diophantine equation ox + by * c, where o, b, 
and c are integers, has a solution in integers if and only if c is a multiple of (o, b). 

In the latter case, a particular solution x = x*, y = y* may be found by the 

Euclidean algorithm, and the most general solution is of the form 

X = X* + fb/(a, b), y “ y* - ra/(o, b), 
where r is any integer. 

Examples: The equation 3x -f- 6y ■■ 22 has no integral solution, since (3,6) 3, 

which does not divide 22. 

The equation 7x + Hy “ 13 has the particular solution x = — 39, y =» 26, 
found as follows: 

11 = 1-7 + 4, 7 = 1-4 + 3, 4 = 1-3 + 1, (7, 11) = 1. 

1 = 4- 3 = 4-(7-4) = 2-4-7 = 2(11 - 7) - 7 = 2-11 - 3-7. 

Hence 

7-(-3) +11(2) =1, 

7-(-39) + 11(26) = 13. 

The other solutions are given by 

X = —39 + Hr, y = 26 — 7r, 

where r is any integer. 

Exercise: Solve the Diophantine equations (a) 3x — 4y * 29. (b)llx + 12y = 68. 
(c) 163x - 34y = 61. 



CHAPTER II 

THE NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


INTRODUCTION 

We must greatly extend the original concept of number as natural 
number in order to create an instrument powerful enough for the needs 
of practice and theory. In a long and hesitant evolution zero, negative 
integers, and fractions were gradually accepted on the same footing 
as the positive integers, and today the rules of operation with these 
numbers are mastered by the average school child. But to gain com¬ 
plete freedom in algebraic operations we must go further by including 
irrational and complex quantities in the number concept. Although 
these extensions of the concept of natural number have been in use for 
centuries and are at the basis of all modern mathematics it is only in 
recent times that they have been put on a logically sound basis. In 
the present chapter we shall give an account of this development. 

§1. THE RATIONAL NUMBERS 

1. Rational Numbers as a Device for Measuring 

The integers are abstractions from the process of counting finite 
collections of objects. But in daily life we need not only to count indi¬ 
vidual objects, but also to measure quantities such as length, area, 
weight, and time. If we want to operate freely with the measures of 
these quantities, which are capable of arbitrarily fine subdivision, it 
is necessary to extend the realm of arithmetic beyond the integers. 
The first step is to reduce the problem of measuring to the problem o] 
counting. First w^e select, quite arbitrarily, a unit of measurement — 
foot, yard, inch, pound, gram, or second as the case may be—to which 
we assign the measure 1. Then we count the number of these units 
which together make up the quantity to be measured. A given mass 
of lead may weigh exactly 54 pounds. In general, however, the process 
of counting units will not “come out even,” and the given quantity will 
not be exactly measurable in terms of integral multiples of the chosen 
unit. The most we can say is that it lies between two successive mul- 

52 



RATIONAL NUMBERS AND MEASURING 


63 


tiples of this unit, say between 63 and 54 pounds. When this occurs, 
we take a further step by introducing new sub-units, obtained by sub¬ 
dividing the original unit into a number n of equal parts. In ordinary 
language, these new sub-units may have special names; for example, the 
foot is divided into 12 inches, the meter into 100 centimeters, the pound 
into 16 ounces, the hour into 60 minutes, the minute into 60 seconds, 
etc. In the symbolism of mathematics, however, a sub-unit obtained 
by dividing the original unit 1 into n equal parts is denoted by the 
symbol 1/n; and if a given quantity contains exactly m of these sub¬ 
units, its measure is denoted by the symbol m/n. This symbol is 
called Si fraction or ratio (sometimes written m:n). The next and de¬ 
cisive step was consciously taken only after centuries of groping effort: 
the symbol m/n was divested of its concrete reference to the process of 
measuring and the quantities measured, and instead considered as a 
pure numbery an entity in itself, on the same footing with the natural 
numbers. When m and n are natural numbers, the symbol m/n is 
called a rational number. 

The use of the word number (originally meaning natural number only) 
for these new symbols is justified by the fact that addition and multi¬ 
plication of these symbols obey the same laws that govern the operations 
with natural numbers. To show this, addition, multiplication, and equal¬ 
ity of rational numbers must first be defined. As everyone knows, 
these definitions are: ^ 


( 1 ) 



ad “h be 
M ^ 


a c __ ac 
b'd~ bd' 



a 

h 


c 

d 


if ad = bcy 


for any integers a, 6, c, d. For example: 

2 4 _ 2.5 -f 3.4 _ 10 + 12 _ 22 2 4 _ 2-4 _ 8 

3‘*’ 5 15” 15^ 3’5 3.5 15^ 

3 ^ A = ^ ^ 

3 ' 12 9 3 ’ 

Precisely these definitions are forced upon us if we wish to use the ra¬ 
tional numbers as measures for lengths, areas, etc. But strictly speak¬ 
ing, these rules for the addition, multiplication, and equality of our 
symbols are established by our own definition and are not imposed upon 
us by any prior necessity other than that of consistency and usefulness 
for applications. On the basis of the definitions (1) we can show that 



54 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


the fundamental laws of the arithmetic of natural numbers continue to hold 
in the domain of rational numbers: 

P + Q — Q + P (commutative law of addition), 

P + ( 3 " + r) = (p + g) + r (associative law of addition), 

(2) pq = qp (commutative law of multiplication), 

p(qr) = (pq)r (associative law of multiplication), 

P(Q + r) pq + pr (distributive law). 

For example, the proof of the commutative law of addition for fractions is 
exhibited by the equations 



ad + be 
bd~~ 


cb + da 



of which the first and last equality signs correspond to the definition (1) 
of addition, while the middle one is a consequence of the commutative 
laws of addition and multiplication of natural numbers. The reader may 
verify the other four laws in the same way. 

For a real understanding of these facts it must be emphasized once 
more that the rational numbers are our own creations, and that the rules 
(1) are imposed at our volition. We might whimsically decree some 

other rule for addition, such as r + ^ = r » which in particular would 

0 d b + d 

yield i + i = 2/4, an absurd result from the point of view of measuring. 
Rules of this type, though logically permissible, would make the arith¬ 
metic of our symbols a meaningless game. The free play of the intellect 
is guided here by the necessity of creating a suitable instrument for 
handling measurements. 


2. Intrinsic Need for the Rational Numbers. Principle of Generalization 

Aside from the ^^practicaF’ reason for the introduction of rational num¬ 
bers, there is a more intrinsic and in some ways an even more compelling 
one, which we shall now discuss quite independently of the preceding 
argument. It is of an entirely arithmetical character, and is typical of 
a dominant tendency in mathematical procedure. 

In the ordinary arithmetic of natural numbers we can always carry 
out the two fundamental operations, addition and multiplication. 
But the ^finverse operations'^ of subtraction and division are not always 
possible. The difference 6 — a of two integers a, b is the integer c 



INTRINSIC NEED FOR RATIONAL NUMBERS 


55 


such that a + c = 6 , i.e. it is the solution of the equation a + z = 6 . 
But in the domain of natural numbers the symbol b — a has a meaning 
only under the restriction 6 > a, for only then does the equation a + x 
b have a natural number a; as a solution. It was a very great step 
towards removing this restriction when the symbol 0 was introduced by 
setting a — a = 0. It was of even greater importance when, through 
the introduction of the symbols —1, —2, —3, • • • , together with the 
definition 

6 — a = —(a — 6) 

for the case 6 < a, it was assured that subtraction could be performed 
without restriction in the domain of positive and negative integers. To 
include the new symbols —1, —2, —3, ••• in an enlarged arithmetic 
which embraces both positive and negative integers we must, of 
course, define operations with them in such a way that the original rules 
of arithmetical operations are preserved. For example, the rule 

(3) (-1)(-1) = 1, 

which we set up to govern the multiplication of negative integers, is a 
consequence of our desire to preserve the distributive law a{b + c) = 
ab + ac. For if we had ruled that (~1)(—1) == —1, then, on setting 
a = — 1, 6 = 1, c = —1, we should have had —1(1 — 1) = —1 — 1 = 
— 2, while on the other hand we actually have —1(1 — 1) = —1-0 = 0. 
It took a long time for mathematicians to realize that the “rule of signs’' 

(3) , together with all the other definitions governing negative integers 
and fractions cannot be “proved.” They are created by us in order to 
attain freedom of operation while preserving the fundamental laws of 
arithmetic. What can —and must—be proved is only that on the basis 
of these definitions the commutative, associative, and distributive laws 
of arithmetic are preserved. Even the great Euler resorted to a thor¬ 
oughly unconvincing argument to show that (—1)(—1) “must” be 
equal to +1. For, as he reasoned, it must either be +1 or —1, and 
cannot be —1, since — 1 = (+1)(—1). 

Just as the introduction of the negative integers and zero clears the 
way for unrestricted subtraction, so the introduction of fractional num¬ 
bers removes the analogous arithmetical obstacle to division. The 
quotient a: = 6/a of two integers a and 6, defined by the equation 

(4) ax = 6, 

exists as an integer only if a is a factor of 6. If this is not the case, as for 
example when a = 2, 6 = 3, we simply introduce a new symbol 6/a, 



56 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 

which we call a fraction, subject to the rule that a{b/a) = a, so that 
b/a is a solution of (4) “by definition/' The invention of the fractions 
as new number symbols makes division possible without restriction— 
except for division by zerOf which is excluded once for all. 

Expressions like 1/0,3/0,0/0, etc. will be for us meaningless symbols. 
For if division by 0 were permitted, we could deduce from the true equa¬ 
tion 0-1 = 0-2 the absurd consequence 1 = 2. It is, however, some¬ 
times useful to denote such expressions by the symbol oo (read, “infin- 
ity'O, provided that one does not attempt to operate with the symbol «> as 
though it were subject to the ordinary rules of calculation with numbers. 
The purely arithmetical significance of the system of all rational 
numbers—integers and fractions, positive and negative—is now appar¬ 
ent. For in this extended number domain not only do the formal asso¬ 
ciative, commutative, and distributive laws hold, but the equations 
a + X = 6 and ax = 6 now have solutions, x = 6 — a and x = 6/a, without 
restriction, provided in the latter case that a 5 ^ 0. In other words, in 
the domain of rational numbers the so-called rational operations—addi¬ 
tion^ subtraction, multiplication, and division—may be performed 
without restriction and will never lead out of this domain. Such a 
closed domain of numbers is called a field. We shall meet with other 
examples of fields later in this chapter and in Chapter III. 

Extending a domain by introducing new symbols in such a way 
that the laws which hold in the original domain continue to hold in the 
larger domain is one aspect of the characteristic mathematical process 
of generalization. The generalization from the natural to the rational 
numbers satisfies both the theoretical need for removing the restrictions 
on subtraction and division, and the practical need for numbers to 
express the results of measurement. It is the fact that the rational 
numbers fill this two-fold need that gives them their true significance. 
As we have seen, this extension of the number concept was made possible 
by the creation of new numbers in the form of abstract symbols like 
0, —2, and 3/4. Today, when we deal with such numbers as a matter 
of course, it is hard to believe that as late as the seventeenth century 
they were not generally credited with the same legitimacy as the posi¬ 
tive integers, and that they were used, when necessary, with a certain 
amount of doubt and trepidation. The inherent human tendency to 
cling to the “concrete," as exemplified by the natural numbers, was 
responsible for this slowness in taking an inevitable step. Only in the 
realm of the abstract can a satisfactory system of arithmetic be created. 



GEOMETRICAL INTERPRETATION OF NUMBERS 


57 


3. Geometrical Interpretation of Rational Numbers 

An illuminating geometrical interpretation of the rational number 
system is given by the following construction. 

On a straight line, the “number axis,” we mark off a segment 0 to 1, 
as in Fig. 8. This establishes the length of the segment from 0 to 1 
as the unit length, which we may choose at will. The positive and 
negative integers are then represented as a set of equidistant points on 
the number axis, the positive numbers to the right of the point 0 and the 


- 3 - 2-10 1 2 3 

Fig. 8. The number axis. 


negative numbers to the left. To represent fractions with the denomina¬ 
tor n, we divide each of the segments of unit length into n equal parts; 
the points of subdivision then represent the fractions with denominator 
n. If we do this for every integer n, then all the rational numbers will 
be represented by points of the number axis. We shall call such points 
rational points^ and we shall use the terms ^'rational number^^ and ‘^ra- 
tional point” interchangeably. 

In Chapter T, §1, we defined the relation A < B for natural numbers. 
This has its analog on the number axis in the fact that if natural numb(M* 
A is less than natural number then point A lies to the left of point B. 
Since the geometrical relation holds between all rational points, we arc 
led to try to extend the arithmetical relation in such a way as to preserve 
the relative geometrical order of the corresponding points. This is 
achieved by the following definition: The rational number A is said to be 
less than the rational number B {A < B), and B is said to be greater than 
A (B > A)/if B — A is positive. It then follows that, ii A < By the 
points (numbers) between A and B arc those which arc both >A and <B. 
Any such pair of distinct points, together with the points between 
them, is called a segmenty or interval^ [Ay 5]. 

The distance of a point, A, from the origin, considered as positive, 
is called the absolute value of A and is indicated by the symbol 


A . 


In words, if A >0, we have | A j = A; if A < 0, we have j A [ = - A. 
It is clear that if A and B have the same sign, the equation | A + fi | 
= I A I + 1 fi I holds, while if A and B have different signs, we have 


58 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[II] 


|A + .Bl<|il| + |B|. Hence, combining these two statements, 
we have the general inequality 

M + bI^UI + IbI, 

which is valid irrespective of the signs of A and B. 

A fact of fundamental importance is expressed in the statement: The 
rational points are dense on the line. By this we mean that within each 
interval, no matter how small, there are rational points. We need only 
take a denominator n large enough so that the interval [0,1/n] is smaller 
than the interval [A, B] in question; then at least one of the fractions 
m/n must lie within the interval. Hence there is no interval on the line, 
however small, which is free from rational points. It follows, moreover, 
that there must be infinitely many rational points in any interval; for, 
if there were only a finite number, the interval between any two adjacent 
rational points would be devoid of rational points, which we have just 
seen to be impossible. 

§2. INCOMMENSURABLE SEGMENTS, IRRATIONAL 
NUMBERS, AND THE CONCEPT OF LIMIT 

L Introduction 

In comparing the magnitudes of two line segments a and 6, it may 
happen that a is contained in b an exact integral number r of times. 
In this case we can express the measure of the segment h in terms of that 
of a by saying that the length of 6 is r times that of a. Or it may turn 
out that while no integral multiple of a equals h, we can divide a into, 
say, n equal segments, each of length o/n, such that some integral multi¬ 
ple m of the segment a/n is equal to 6: 

(1) 6 = -a. 

n 

When an equation of the form (1) holds we say that the two segments 
o and h are commensurable, since they have as a common measure the 
segment a/n which goes n times into a and m times into h. The totality 

■« .-J 0 i i I t y—“ 

Fig. 9. Rational points. 

of all segments commensurable with a will be those whose length can be 
expressed in the form ( 1 ) for some choice of integers m and n (n 5 ^ 0 ). 
If we choose o as th?* unit segment, [0, 1], in Figure 9, then the segments 


INTRODUCTION 


59 


commensurable with the unit segment will correspond to all the ra¬ 
tional points m/n on the number axis. For all practical purposes of 
measuring, the rational numbers are entirely sufficient. Even from a 
theoretical viewpoint, since the set of rational points covers the line 
densely, it might seem that all points on the line are rational points. 
If this were true, then any segment would be commensurable with the 
unit. It was one of the most surprising discoveries of early Greek mathe¬ 
matics (the Pythagorean school) that the situation is by no means so 
simple. There exist incommensurable segments or, if we assume that to 
every segment corresponds a number giving its length in terms of the 
unit, irrational numbers. This revelation was a scientific event of the 
highest importance. Quite possibly it marked the origin of what we 
consider to be the specifically Greek contribution to rigorous procedure 
in mathematics. Certainly it has profoundly affected mathematics 
and philosophy from the time of the Greeks to the present day. 

Eudoxus’ theory of incommensurables, presented in geometrical form in 
Euclid’s ElementSy is a masterpiece of Greek mathematics, though it is 
usually omitted from the diluted high-school versions of this classical 
work. The theory became fully appreciated only in the late nine¬ 
teenth century, after Dedekind, Cantor, and Weierstrass had constructed 
a rigorous theory of irrational numbers. We shall present the theory 
in the modern arithmetical way. 

First we show: The diagonal of a square is incommensurable with its 
side. We may suppose that the side of the given square is chosen as 
the unit of length, and that the diagonal has the length x. Then, by 
the Pythagorean theorem, we have 

a;* = = 2. 

(We may denote x by the symbol \/2.) Now if x were commensurable 
with 1, we could find two integers p and q such that x = p/q and 

(2) p^ - 2q\ 

We may suppose that p/q is already in lowest terms, since any common 
factor in numerator and denominator could be cancelled out at the begin¬ 
ning. Since 2 appears as a factor of the right side, p^ is an even number, 
and hence p itself is even, because the square of an odd number is odd. 
We may therefore write p = 2r. Equation (2) then becomes 

4r* * 2q^, or 2r* = q^. 

Since 2 is a factor of the left side, g*, and hence q must also be even. 
Thus p and q are both divisible by 2, which contradicts the assumption 



NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


60 


[III 


that p and q had no common factor. Therefore, equation (2) cannot 
hold, and z cannot be a rational number. 

Our result can be caressed by the statement that there is no rational 
number equal to \/2. 

The argument of the preceding paragraph shows that a very simple 
geometrical construction may result in a segment incommensurable with 
the unit. If such a segment is marked off on the number axis by means 
of a compass, the point so constructed cannot coincide with any of the 



0 l V5 


Fif. 10. Construction of \/T. 

rational points: The system of rational points^ although it is everywhere 
dense, does not cover all of the number axis. To the naive mind it must 
certainly appear very strange and paradoxical that the dense set of ra¬ 
tional points does not cover the whole line. Nothing in our ^^ntuition^^ 
can help us to '^see^^ the irrational points as distinct from the rational 
ones. No wonder that the discovery of the incommensurable stirred 
the Greek philosophers and mathematicians, and that it has retained 
even today its provocative effect on thoughtful minds. 

It would be very easy to construct as many segments incommensurable 
with the unit as we want. The end-points of such segments, if marked 
off from the point 0 on the number axis, are called irrational points. 
Now, the guiding principle in introducing fractions was the measuring 
of lengths by numbers, and we should like to maintain this principle in 
dealing with segments incommensurable with the unit. If we demand 
that there should be a mutual correspondence between numbers on the one 
hand and points of a straight line on the other, it is necessary to introduce 
irrational numbers. 

Summarizing the situation thus far we may say that an irrational 
number represents the length of a segment incommensurable with the 
unit. In the following sections we shall refine this somewhat vague and 
entirely geometrical definition, until we arrive at one more satisfactory 
from the point of view of logical rigor. Our first approach to the sub¬ 
ject will be by way of the decimal fractions. 

Exercises: 1) Prove that Vi, V6, V3 are nqt rational. (Hint: Use the 

lemma of p. 47). 

2) Prove that V2 + Vi and V2 + ^2 are not rational. (Hint: If e.g. the 



INTRODUCTION 


61 


first of these numbers were equal to a rational number r then, writing 
Vs = r — VS and squaring, V2 would be rational.) 

3) Prove that ^/2 + \/3 + \/6 is irrational. Try to make up similar and more 
general examples. 

2. Decimal Fractions. Infinite Decimals 

In order to cover the number axis with a set of points ever 3 rwhere 
dense, we do not need the totality of all rational numbers; for example, 
it suffices to consider only those numbers which originate by subdivision 
of each unit interval into 10, then 100, 1000, etc. equal segments. The 
points so obtained correspond to the ‘‘decimal fractions.'' For example, 
the point 0.12 = 1/10 + 2/100 corresponds to the point lying in the 
first unit interval, in the second subinterval of length 10“\ and at the 
initial point of the third “sub-sub-" interval of length 10“^. (o”" 

means l/a".) Such a decimal fraction^ if it contains n digits after the 
decimal point, has the form 

f=z + ailO”' + ajl0~* + ail0“* + • • • + OnlO"", 


where z is an integer and the a's are digits—0,1,2, • • • , 9—indicating 
the tenths, hundredths and so on. The number/is represented in the 
decimal system by the abbreviated symbol z.aia%a^ •••an. We see 
immediately that these decimal fractions can be written in the ordinary 
form of a fraction p/q where q = 10"; for example, / = 1.314 « 1 + 
3/10 + 1/100 + 4/1000 = 1314/1000. If p and q have a common 
divisor, the decimal fraction may then be reduced to a fraction with a 
denominator which is some divisor of 10". On the other hand, no frac¬ 
tion in lowest terms whose denominator is not a divisor of some power of 

1 2 

10 can be represented as a decimal fraction. For example, ^ = 

o 10 


0.2, and 


1 _ 4 

250 1000 


== 0.004; but ^ cannot be written as a decimal 


fraction with a finite number n of decimal places, however great n be 
chosen, for an equation of the form 


would imply 


i = 6/10" 


10" = 36, 


which is absurd, since 3 is not a factor of any power of 10. 

Now let us choose any point P on the number axis which does not 
correspond to a decimal fraction; e.g. the rational point i or the irra¬ 
tional point \/2. Then in the process of subdividing the unit interval 
into ten equal parts, and so on, P will never occur as the initial point 
of a subinterval. Still, P can be included within smaller and smaller 



62 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


I III 


intervals of the decimal division with any desired degree of approxi¬ 
mation. This approximation process may be described as follows. 

Suppose that P lies in the first unit interval. We subdivide this 
interval into 10 equal parts, each of length 10“\ and find, say, that P 
lies in the third such interval. At this stage we can say that P lies 
between the decimal fractions 0.2 and 0.3. We subdivide the interval 
from 0.2 to 0.3 into 10 equal parts, each of length 10"”^ and find that P 
lies, say, in the fourth such interval. Subdividing this in turn, we find 
that P lies in the first interval of length 10“*. We can now say that P 
lies between 0.230 and 0.231. This process can be continued indefinitely, 
and leads to an unending sequence of digits, ai, oj, as, • • • , Un , • • • , 
with the following property: whatever number n we choose, the point P 
is included in the interval In whose left-hand end-point is the decimal 
fraction 0 .aia 2 a 3 • • • Un-iUn and whose right-hand end-point is 
0.aia2aa • • • an-i(an + 1), the length of In being 10“^^. If we choose in 
succession n = 1, 2, 3, 4, •. • , we see that each of these intervals, 
7i , /a , Js , • • • , is contained in the preceding one, while their lengths, 
lO"”^, lO"**, 10“^ • • • , tend to zero. We say that the point P is con¬ 
tained in a nested sequence of decimal intervals. For example, if P is 
the rational point then all the digits oi, oa, as, • • • are equal to 3, 
and P is contained in every interval In which extends from 0.333 • • • 33 
to 0.333 ••• 34; i.e., ^ is greater than 0.333 •••33 but less than 
0.333 • • • 34, where the number of digits may be taken arbitrarily large. 
We express this fact by saying that the n-digit decimal fraction 0.333 
• • • 33 ^‘tends to as n increases. We write 

\ = 0.333 ... , 

the dots indicating that the decimal fraction is to be extended ^‘in¬ 
definitely.^' 

The irrational point \/2 defined in Article 1 also leads to an in¬ 
definitely extended decimal fraction. Here, however, the law which 
determines the values of the digits in the sequence is by no means ob¬ 
vious. In fact, no explicit formula that determines the successive 
digits is known, although one may calculate as many digits as desired: 

1* = 1<2<2* = 4 
(1.4)' = 1.96 < 2 < (1.5)' == 2.25 
(1.41)' = 1.9881 < 2 < (1.42)' = 2.0264 
(1.414)' = 1.999396 < 2 < (1.415)' = 2.002225 
(1.4142)' « 1.99996164 < 2 < (1.4143)' = 2.00024449, etc. 



DECIMAL FRACTIONS 


63 


As a general definition we say that a point P that is not represented 
by any decimal fraction with a finite number n of digits is represented 
by the infinite decimal fractiony z.aio^az • • • , if for every value of n the 
point P lies in the interval of length 10“'" with z,aia 2 az • * • an as its initial 
point. 

In this manner there is established a correspondence between all the 
points on the number axis and all the finite and infinite decimal fractions 
We offer the tentative definition: a '^number” is a finite or infinite deci¬ 
mal. Those infinite decimals which do not represent rational numbers 
are called irrational numbers. 

Until the middle of the nineteenth century these considerations were 
accepted as a satisfactory explanation of the system of rational and 
irrational numbers, the continuum of numbers. The enormous advance 
of mathematics since the seventeenth century, in particular the de¬ 
velopment of analytic geometry and of the differential and integral 
calculus, proceeded safely with this concept of the number system as a 
basis. But during the period of critical re-examination of principles 
and consolidation of results, it was felt more and more that the concept 
of irrational number required a more precise analysis. As a preliminary 
to our account of the modern theory of the number continuum we shall 
discuss in a more or less intuitive fashion the basic concept of limit. 

Exercise: Calculate -^2 and with an accuracy of at least 10“*. 


3. Limits. Infinite Geometrical Series 


As we saw in the preceding section, it sometimes happens that a 
certain rational number 5 is approximated by a sequence of other rational 
numbers Sn , where the index n assumes consecutively all the values 
1 , 2 , 3, • • • . For example, if s = 1/3, then Si = 0.3, 52 = 0.33, 53 = 
0.333, etc. As another example, let us divide the unit interval into two 
halves, the second half again into two equal parts, the second of these 
again into two equal parts, and so forth, until the smallest intervals thus 
obtained have the length 2“”, where n is chosen arbitrarily large, e.g. n = 
100, n = 100,000, or any number we please. Then by adding together 
all the intervals except the VQry last one we obtain a total length 
equal to 


(3) 


1 , 1 , 1 , 1 ,1 

2 + 4 + 8+16 


We see that s„ differs from 1 by (i)", and that this difference becomes ar¬ 
bitrarily small, or “tetids to zero” as n increases indefinitely. It makes no 



64 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


mi 


sense to say that the difference is zero if n is infinite. The infinite enters 
only in the unending ‘procedure and not as an actual quantity. We 
describe the behavior of 8« by saying that the sum Sn approaches the 
limit 1 08 n tends to infinity, and by writing 

(4) Irrl+i+i + lj-.... 

where on the right we have an infinite series. This “equation” does 
not mean that we actually have to add infinitely many terms; it is only 
an abbreviated expression for the fact that 1 is the limit of the finite 
sum 8n as n tends to infinity (by no means is infinity). Thus equation 

(4) with its incomplete symbol “+ • • •” is merely mathematical short¬ 
hand for the precise statement 

1 ■■ the limit as n tends to infinity of the quantity 

( 5 ) 8, = 1 4- 1 4. 1 -1- . .. + 1 . 

^ ' " 2 ~ 2* ~ 2* ~ ~ 2" 

In an even more abbreviated but expressive form we write 

(6) 5n 1 as n 00 . 

As another example of limit, we consider the powers of a number q. 
If —1 < g < 1, e.g. q = 1/3 or g = —4/5, then the successive powers 
of q, 

Qf Q f Q 9 i 9 • • • 9 Q 9 • • • 9 

will approach zero as n increases. If q is negative, the sign of q"" will 
alternate from + to —, and g’* will tend to zero from alternate sides 
Thus if g = 1/3, then g* = 1/9, g* = 1/27, g* = 1/81, • • • , while if g = 
— 1/2, then g* = 1/4, g* === —1/8, g^ = 1/16, • • • . We say that the 
jimtt of q“, 08 n tends to infinity, is zero^ or, in symbols, 

(7) g*" —> 0 as n —» 00 , for — 1 < g < 1. 

(Incidentally, ifg> lorg< —1 then g"* does not tend to zero, but in¬ 
creases in magnitude without limit.) 

To give a rigorous proof of the assertion (7) we start with the inequal¬ 
ity proved on page 15, which states that (1 + p)** > 1 + np for any 
positive integer n and p > — 1. If g is any fixed number between 0 and 
1, e.g. g = 9/10, we have g = 1/(1 + p), where p > 0. Hence 

“ = (1 + pY > 1 + np > np. 



LIMITS. INFINITE GEOMETRICAL SERIES 


65 


or (see rule 4, p. 322) 


0 < g** < 


is therefore included between the fixed bound 0 and the bound 
(l/p)(l/n) which approaches zero as n increases, since p is fixed. This 
makes it evident that 0. If g is negative, we have g = —1/(1 + p) 
and the bounds become (-“l/p)(l/n) and (l/p)(l/n) instead of 0 
and (l/p)(l//z). Otherwise the reasoning remains unchanged. 

We now consider the geometrical series 

( 8 ) = 1 + g + + g* + • • • + g". 

(The case g = 1/2 was discussed above.) As shown on page 13, we 
can express the sum Sn in a simple and concise form. If we multiply 
Sn by g, we find 

( 8 a) qsn = q ++ q'+ q* + ■■• + 5 ”+', 

and by subtraction of ( 8 a) from ( 8 ) we see that all terms except 1 and 
g”^^ cancel out. We obtain by this device 


or, by division. 


(1 - Q>n 




1-3 1-3 1-3 

The concept of limit comes into play if we let n increase. As we have 
seen, g”^^ = g • g” tends to zero if — 1 < g < 1, and we obtain the 
limiting relation 


(9) Sn ;-as n 00 , for — 1 < g < 1 . 

1 - g 

Written as an infinite geometrical series this becomes 


1 + 9 + 9' + 9’ + 


, for -1 < 3 < 1 . 


For example, 


^ + 2 ^ 


^ 2 2^ ' 2* ' 1 - i 

in agreement with equation (4), and similarly 

10 10 * 10 * 10 * ' 10 1 - 



66 


NXJMBER SYSTEM OP MATHEMATICS 


III) 


SO that 0.99999 • • • = 1. Similarly, the finite decimal 0.2374 and the 
infinite decimal 0.23739999999 ■ • * represent the same number. 

In Chapter VI we shall resume the general discussion of the limit 
concept in the modern spirit of rigor. 


Exercises: 1) Prove that 1 — j + g* — g’+g* — 




2) What is the liimt of the sequence ai, 01 , 03 , , where o„ — n/(n + 1)? 

(Hint: Write the expression in the form »/{n + 1) — 1 — l/(n + 1) and observe 
that the second term tends to zero.) 

3) What is the limit of —-— forn oo? (Hint: Write the expression 

n* — n -f- 1 

in the form 

n n* 
n n* 


4) Prove, for | 5 | < 1, that 1 -f 2g -f + 4g» -f 

Use the result of exercise 3 on p. 18.) 

6) What is the limit of the infinite series 

1 - 25 4- 3g* - 4g» + • • • ? 


(1 - g) 


(Hint; 


6) What is the limit of 


1 + 24-3 4- 


4 n ^ 1* 4- 2» 4 
-, of-- 


1 » + 2 » + 


, and of 


? (Hint; Use the results of pp. 12, 14, 16.) 


4. Rational Numbers and Periodic Decimals 

Those rational numbers p/q which are not finite decimal fractions can 
be expanded into infinite decimal fractions by performing the elementary 
process of long division. At each stage in this process there must be a 
non-zero remainder, for otherwise the decimal fraction would be finite. 
All the different remainders that arise in the process of division will be 
integers between 1 and g — 1, so that there are at most g — 1 different possi¬ 
bilities for the values of the remainders. This means that within at 
most g divisions some remainder k will turn up for a second time. But 
then all subsequent remainders will repeat in the same order in which 
they appeared after the remainder k first appeared. This shows that 
the decimal expression for any rational number is periodic] after some finite 
set of digits has appeared initially, the same digit or group of digits will 



RATIONAL NUMBERS AND PERIODIC DECIMALS 


67 


repeat itself infinitely often. For example, 1/6 = 0.166666666 *.• ; 
1/7 = 0.142857142857142857 ... ; 1/11 = 0.09090909 ... ; 122/1100 = 
0.1109090909 ; 11/90 = 0.122222222 ... ; etc. (Those rational 

numbers which can be represented as finite decimal fractions may be 
thought of as having periodic decimal expansions with the figure 0 
repeating itself infinitely often after a finite number of digits.) We see, 
incidentally, that some of these periodic decimals have a non-periodic 
head before the periodic tail begins. 

Conversely, it may be shown that all periodic decimals are rational 
numbers. As an example, let us take the infinite periodic decimal 

p = 0.3322222 .... 

We have p = 33/100 + 10 "‘ 2(1 + 10 "‘ + 10’’ H-). The expression 

in parentheses is the infinite geometrical series 


Hence 


1 + 10 "‘ + 10 "’ + 10 "’ + 


1 _ 10 
1 - 1/10 9 ■ 


= + 2 10"’ - = = ???0 ^ 299 

^ iOO"^ ■ * 9 “ 9.10’ 9000 900' 


The proof in the general case is essentially the same, but requires a 
more general notation. In the general periodic decimal 

p = 0 .a\a2,az * * * ambib2 • • • bnbib2 • • * bnbib2 • • • bn • • • 

we set 0.6162 ... 6 n = B, so that B represents the periodic part of the 
decimal. Then p becomes 

p = O.aioj ... a„ + lO'^BCl + 10"” + 10"’" + 10"'" • • •). 

The expression in parentheses is an infinite geometrical series with 
q = 10“”. Its sum, according to equation (10) of the previous article, 
is 1/(1 — 10””), and therefore 

p = O.aiCh • • • Om + 


Exercises: 1) Expand the fractions ~ into decimal fractions 

and determine the period. 

*2) The number 142,857 has the property that multiplication with any one of 
the numbers 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 produces only a cyclic permutation of its digits. Ex¬ 
plain this property, using the expansion of \ into a decimal fraction. 

3) Expand the rational numbers of exercise 1 as ‘‘decimals’* with bases 6, 7 
and 12. 

4) Expand one-third as a dyadic number. 




68 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 

5 ) Write .11212121 ••• as a fraction. Find the value of this symbol if it is 
meant in the systems with the bases 3 or 5. 

5. General Definition of Irrational Numbers by Nested Intervals 

On page 63 we adopted the tentative definition: a ‘^number*’ is a 
finite or infinite decimal. We agreed that those infinite decimals which 
do not represent rational numbers should be called irrational numbers. 
On the basis of the results of the preceding section we may now formu¬ 
late this definition as follows: the continuum of number or real number 
system (^VeaF’ in contrast to the ‘‘imaginaryor “complex^' numbers 
to be introduced in §5) is the totality of infinite decimals. (Finite decimals 
may be considered as a special case where all digits from a certain point 
on are zero, or one might just as well prescribe that, instead of taking a 
finite decimal the last digit of which is a, we write down an infinite decimal 
with a — 1 in place of a, followed by an infinite number of digits all equal 
to 9. This expresses the fact that .999 • • ‘ = 1, according to Article 3.) 
The rational numbers are the periodic decimals; the irrational numbers 
are the non-periodic decimals. Even this definition docs not seem 
entirely satisfactory; for, as we have seen in Chapter I, the decimal sys¬ 
tem is in no way singled out by the nature of things. We might just as 
well have gone through the reasoning with the dyadic or any other 
system. For this reason it is desirable to give a more general definition 
of the number continuum, detached from special reference to the base 
ten. Perhaps the simplest way to do this is the following: 

Let us consider any sequence /i, / 2 , • • • , /n , • • • of intervals on the 
number axis with rational end-points, each of which is contained in the 
preceding one, and such that the length of the n-th interval In tends 
to zero as n increases. Such a sequence is called a sequence of nested 
intervals. In the case of decimal intervals the length of In is 10“'^ but 
it may just as well be 2"” or merely restricted to the milder requirement 
that it be less than 1/n. Now we formulate as a basic postulate of geom¬ 
etry: corresponding to each such sequence of nested intervals there is 
precisely one point on the number-axis which is contained in all of them. 
(It is seen directly that there cannot be more than one point common 
to all the intervals, for the lengths of the intervals tend to zero, and two 
different points could not both be contained in any interval smaller than 
the distance between them.) This point is called by definition a real 
number] if it is not a rational point it is called an irrational number. 
By this definition we establish a perfect correspondence between points 
and numbers. It is nothing but a more general formulation of what was 
expressed by the definition using infinite decimals. 



DEFINITION OF IRRATIONAL NUMIJEHS 


69 


Here the reader may be troubled by an entirely legitimate doubt. 
What is this ^^point^' on the number axis, which we assumed to belong 
to all the intervals of a nested sequence, in case it is not a rational point? 
Our answer is: the existence on the number axis (regarded as a line) 
of a point contained in every nested sequence of intervals with rational 
end-points is a fundamental 'postulate of geometry. No logical reduction 
of this postulate to other mathematical facts is required. We accept it, 
just as we accept other axioms or postulates in mathematics, because 
of its intuitive plausibility and its usefulness in building a consistent 
system of mathematical thought. From a purely formal point of view, 
we may start with a line made up only of rational points and then defi'ne 






11. Ntwtcd intt*rvals, Liinits of soquencw^. 


an irrational point as just a symbol for a certain sequence of nested rational 
intervals. An irrational point is completely described by a sequence 
of nested rational intervals with lengths tending to zero. Hence our 
fundamental postulate really amounts to a definition. To make this 
definition after having been led to a sequence of nested rational intervals 
by an intuitive feeling that the irrational j)oint “exists,” is to throw 
away the intuitive crutch with which our reasoning proceeded and to 
realize that all the mathematical properties of irrational points may be 
expressed as properties of nested sequences of rational intervals. 

We have here a typical instance of the philosophical position described 
in the introduction to this book; to discard the naive “realistic” approach 






70 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


that regards a mathematical object as a '^thing in itself'^ of which we 
humbly investigate the properties, and instead to realize that the only 
relevant existence of mathematical objects lies in their mathematical 
properties and in the relations by which they are interconnected. These 
relations and properties exhaust the possible aspects under which an 
object can enter the realm of mathematical activity. We give up the 
mathematical 'Thing in itself^' as physics gave up the unobservable 
ether. This is the meaning of the "intrinsic^^ definition of an irrational 
number as a nested sequence of rational intervals. 

The mathematically important point here is that for these irrational 
numbers, defined as nested sequences of rational intervals, the operations 
of addition, multiplication, etc., and the relations of "less than'^ and 
"greater than,^' are capable of immediate generalization from the field of 
rational numbers in such a way that all the laws which hold in the ra¬ 
tional number field are preserved. For example, the addition of two 
irrational numbers a. and 0 can be defined in terms of the two sequences 
of nested intervals defining oc and P respectively. We construct a third 
sequence of nested intervals by adding the initial values and the end 
values of corresponding intervals of the two sequences. The new 
sequence of nested intervals defines a + 13. Similarly, we may define the 
product afij the difference a — 0^ and the quotient a/0. On the basis 
of these definitions the arithmetical laws discussed in §1 of this chapter 
can be shown to hold for irrational numbers also. The details are 
omitted here. 

The verification of these laws is simple and straightforward, though 
somewhat tedious for the beginner who is more anxious to learn what 
can be done with mathematics than to analyze its logical foundations. 
Some modern textbooks on mathematics repel many students by starting 
with a pedantically complete analysis of the real number system. The 
reader who simply disregards these introductions may find comfort in 
the thought that until late in the nineteenth century all the great mathe¬ 
maticians made their discoveries on the basis of the "naive” con¬ 
cept of the number system supplied by their intuition. 

From a physical point of view, the definition of an irrational number 
by a sequence of nested intervals corresponds to the determination of the 
value of some observable quantity by a sequence of measurements of 
greater and greater accuracy. Any given operation for determining, 
say, a length, will have a practical meaning only within the limits of a 
certain possible error which measures the precision of the operation. 
Since the rational numbers are dense on the line, it is impossible to deter- 



DEFINITION OF IRRATIONAL NUMBERS 


71 


mine by any physical operation, however precise, whether a given length 
is rational or irrational. Thus it might seem that the irrational numbers 
are unnecessary for the adequate description of physical phenomena. 
But as we shall see inore clearly in Chapter VI, the real advantage which 
the introduction of irrational numbers brings to the mathematical 
description of physical phenomena is that this description is enormously 
simplified by the free use of the limit concept, for which the number 
continuum is the basis. 

*6. Alternative Methods of Defining Irrational 
Numbers. Dedekind Cuts 

A somewhat different way of defining irrational numbers was chosen 
by Richard Dcdekind (1831 1916), one of the great pioneers in the logical 
and philosophical analysis of the foundations of mathematics. His 
essays, Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen (1872) and Was sind und was 
sollen die Zahlen? (1887), exercised a profound influence on studies in 
the foundations of mathematics. Dedekind preferred to operate with 
general abstract ideas rather than with specific sequences of nested 
intervals. His procedure is based on the definition of a ^^cut,^^ which 
we shall describe briefly. 

Suppose there is given some method for dividing the set of all rational 
numbers into two classes, A and B, such that every element b of class B 
is greater than every element a of class A. Any classification of this 
sort is called a cut in the set of rational numbers. For a cut there are just 
three possibilities, one and only one of which must hold: 

1) There is a largest element of A. This is the case, for example, 
if A consists of all rational numbers < 1 and B of all rational num¬ 
bers > 1. 

2) There is a smallest element b* of B, This is the case, for example, 
if A consists of all rational numbers < 1 and B of all rational num¬ 
bers > 1. 

3) There is neither a largest element in A nor a smallest element in B. 
This is the case, for example, if A consists of all negative rational 
numbers, 0, and all positive rational numbers with square less than 
2 and B of all rational numbers with square greater than 2. A 
and B together include all rational numbers, for we have proved 
that there is no rational number whose square is equal to 2. 

The case in which A has a largest element a* and B a smallest element 
6* is impossible, for then the rational number (a* + ?>*)/2, which lies 
halfway between a* and would be larger than the largest element of 



72 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


A and smaller than the smallest element of B, and hence could belong 
to neither. 

In the third case, where there is neither a largest rational number in 
A nor a smallest rational number in B, the cut is said by Dedekind to 
define or simply to an irrational number. It is easily seen that this 
definition is in agreement with the definition by nested intervals; any 
sequence /i, /a, /a, • • • of nested intervals defines a cut if we place in 
the class A all those rational numbers which are exceeded by the left- 
hand end-point of at least one of the intervals In t in B all other. 
rational numbers. 

Philosophically, Dedekind’s definition of irrational numbers involves a rather 
high degree of abstraction, since it places no restrictions on the nature of the 
mathematical law which defines the two classes A and B. A more concrete 
method of defining the real number continuum is due to Georg Cantor (1845- 
1918). Although at first sight quite different from the method of nested intervals 
or of cuts, it is equivalent to either of them, in the sense that the number systems 
defined in these three ways have the same properties. Cantor’s idea was sug¬ 
gested by the facts that 1) real numbers may be regarded as infinite decimals, 
and 2) infinite decimals are limits of finite decimal fractions. Freeing ourselves 
from dependence on the decimal system, we may state with Cantor that any 
sequence ai , ai, aj, • • • of rational numbers defines a real number if it **con- 
verges.” Convergence is understood to mean that the difference (am — an) 
between any two members of the sequence tends to zero when am and an are suffi¬ 
ciently far out in the sequence, i.e. as m and n tend to infinity. (The successive 
decimal approximations to any number have this property, since any two after 
the nth can differ by at most 10“".) Since there are many ways of approaching 
the same real number by a sequence of rational numbers, we say that two con¬ 
vergent sequences of rationale ai, a2, aa, • • • and 6i , 62, 6i, • • • define the 
same real number if an — bn tends to zero as n increases indefinitely. The oper¬ 
ations of addition, etc., for such sequences are quite easy to define. 

§3. REMARKS ON ANALYTIC GEOMETRYf 
1. The Basic Principle 

The number continuum, whether it is accepted as a matter of course 
or only after a critical examination, has been the basis of mathematics— 
and in particular of analytic geometry and the calculus—since the 
seventeenth century. 

Introducing the continuum of numbers makes it possible to associate 
with each line segment a definite real number as its length. But we may 

t For readers who are not familiar with the subject, a series of exercises on the 
elements of analytic geometry will be found in the appendix at the end of the 
book, pp. 489-494. 



THE BASIC PRINCIPLE 


73 


go much farther. Not only length, but every geometrical object and every 
geometrical operation can be referred to the realm of numbers. The decisive 
steps in this arithmetization of geometry were taken as early as 1629 
by Fermat (1601-1655) and 1637 by Descartes (1596-1650). The 
fundamental idea of analytic geometry is the introduction of “coordi¬ 
nates,” that is, numbers attached to or coordinated with a geometrical 
o6jec< and characterizing this object completely. Known to most read¬ 
ers are the so-called rectangular or Cartesian coordinates which serve 
to characterize the position of an arbitrary point P in a plane. We 
start with two fixed perpendicular lines in the plane, the “x-axis” and 
the “y-axis,” to which we refer every point. These lines are regarded as 
directed number axes, and measured with the same unit. To each point 
P, as in Figure 12, two coordinates, z and y, are assigned. These are 



Fig. 12. Rectangular cocrdinatee of a point. 



obtained as follows: we consider the directed segment from the ‘‘origin’^ 
0 to the point P, and project this directed segment, sometimes called 
the ‘‘position vector’' of the point P, perpendicularly on the two axes, 
obtaining the directed segment OP' on the x-axis, with the number x 
measuring its directed length from 0, and likewise the directed segment 
OQ' on the y-axis, with the number y measuring its directed length from 
0. The two numbers x and y are called the co6rdinates of P 
Conversely, if x and y are two arbitrarily prescribed numbers, then the 
corresponding point P is uniquely determined. If x and y are both 
positive, P is in theirs/ quadiani of the coordinate system (see Fig. 13); 
if both are negative, P is in the third quadrant; if x is positive and y 
negative, it is in the fourth, and if x is negative and y positive, in the 
second. 



74 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


III] 


The distance between the point Pi with coordinates xi, yi and the 
point P* with coSrdinates x*, is given by the formula 

(1) d’ = (xi - XtY + (j/i - ys)*. 

This follows immediately from the Pythagorean theorem, as may be 
seen from Figure 14. 


y 



Fig. 14. The distance between two points. 


*2. Equations of Lines and Curves 

If C is a fixed point with coordinates x = a, i/ = 6, then the locus of 
all points P having a given distance r from C is a circle with C as center 
and radius r. It follows from the distance formula (1) that the points 
of this circle have coordinates x, y which satisfy the equation 

(2) (x - af + ( 2 / - bf = 

This is called the equation of the circle, because it expresses the complete 
(necessary and sufficient) condition on the co5rdinates x, 2 / of a point P 



Fig. 15. The circle. 


that lies on the circle around C with radius r. If the parentheses are 
expanded, equation (2) takes the form 

(3) X* + y* — 2ax — 2 hy = k. 





EQUATIONS OF LINES AND CURVES 


76 


where k ^ — cf -- 6*. Conversely, if an equation of the form (3) is 

given, where a, 6, and k are arbitrary constants such that k + c? + 
is positive, then by the algebraic process of “completing the square^' 
we can write the equation in the form 

{x — a)* + (y — 6)* = r*, 

where r* = A; + a* + 6^. It follows that the equation (3) defines a 
circle of radius r around the point C with coordinates a and b. 

The equations of straight lines are even simpler in form. For example, 
the x-axis has the equation y = 0, since 2 / = 0 for all points on the 
a:-axia and for no other points. The y-axis has the equation x = 0. 
The lines through the origin bisecting the angles between the axes have 
the equations z = y and rc = — y. It is easily shown that any straight 
line has an equation of the form 


(4) 


ax + by = c, 


where a, b, c are fixed constants characterizing the line. The meaning 
of equation (4) is again that all pairs of real numbers x, y which satisfy 
this equation are the coordinates of a point of the line, and conversely. 
The reader may have learned that the equation 


( 6 ) 




represents an ellipse (Fig. 16). This curve cuts the x-axis at the points 
a Ip, 0) and — 0), and the y-axis at B(0, q) and JS'(0, —q). (The 

notation P(x, y) or simply (x, y) is used as a shorter way of writing 
“the point P with coordinates x and y”) If p > y, the segment AA\ 
of length 2p, is called the major axis of the ellipse, while the segment 
BB\ of length 2y, is called the minor axis. This ellipse is the locus of 
all points P the sum of whose distances from the points F {\/— q^, 0) 
and F'{ — \/p^ — q^, 0) is 2p. As an exercise the reader may verify 
this by using formula (1). The points F and F' are called the foci 


(singular, focus) of the ellipse, and the ratio e 


^ is called the 
V 


eccentricity of the ellipse. 
An equation of the form 


( 6 ) 



1 


represents a hyperbola. This curve consists of two branches which cut 
the x-axis at A (p, 0) and A'(—p, 0) (Fig. 17) respectively. The segment 



76 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


AA', of length 2 p, is called the transverse axis of the hyperbola. The 
hyperbola approaches more and more nearly the two straight lines 
qx ± py = 0 8L8 we go out farther and farther from the origin, but it 
never actually reaches these lines. They are called the asymptotes of 
the hyperbola. The hyperbola is the locus of all points P the 
differenc e of wh ose distances to the two points F(\^p^ + 52 , 0 ) and 
+ 0) is 2p, These points are again called the foci of 


the hyperbola; by its eccentricity we mean the ratio e 


Vp^ + 
V 



Fig. 16. The ellipee; F and F* are the foci. 



The equation 


( 7 ) xy = 1 

also defines a hyperbola, whose asymptotes now are the two axes (Fig. 18). 
The equation of this ‘^equilateraF’ hyperbola indicates that the area 
of the rectangle determined by P is equal to 1 for every point P on the 
curve. An equilateral hyperbola whose equation is 

(7a) xy = c, 

c being a constant, is only a special case of the general hyperbola, just as 
the circle is a special case of the ellipse. The special character of the 
equilateral hyperbola lies in the fact that its two asymptotes (in this 
case the two coordinate axes) are perpendicular to each other. 

For us the main point here is the fundamental idea that geometrical 
objects may be completely represented in numerical and algebraic terms, 
and that the same is true of geometrical operations. For example, if 
we want to find the point of intersection of two lines, we consider their 
two equations 



EQUATIONS OF LINES AND CURVES 


77 


<« + 6j-c 

«'i + b'y - 

The point common to the two lines is then found simply by determining 
its cofirdinates as the solution x, y of the two simultaneous equations 
(8). Similarly, the points of intersection of any two curves, such as 
the circle - 2ax - 2by = k and the straight line ax + by == c, 

are found by solving the two corresponding equations simultaneously. 



Figj. 18. The oquilateral hyperbola ly * 1. The area xy of the reotangle determined by the point 

P (ar, y) is equal to 1. 

§4. THE MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF INFINITY 
1. Fundamental Concepts 

The sequence of positive integers 

1,2, 3, ... 

is the first and most important example of an infinite set. There is no 
mystery about the fact that this sequence has no end, no “finis^^ for, 
however large be the integer /i, the next integer, n + 1, can always be 
formed. But in the passage from the adjective “infinite,” meaning 
simply “without end,” to the noun “infinity” we must not make the 
assumption that “infinity,” usually expressed by the special symbol oo, 
can be considered as though it were an ordinary number. We cannot 
include the symbol oo in the real number system and at the 
same time preserve the fundamental rules of arithmetic. Neverthe¬ 
less, the concept of the infinite pervades all of mathematics, since 
mathematical objects are usually studied, not as individuals, but as 
members of classes or aggregates containing infinitely many objects of 




78 NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS IIII 

the same type, such as the totality of integers, or of real numbers, or of 
triangles in a plane. For this reason it is necessary to analyze the 
mathematical infinite in a precise way. The modern theory of sets, 
created by Georg Cantor and his school at the end of the nineteenth 
century, has met this challenge with striking success. Cantoris theory 
of sets has penetrated and strongly influenced many fields of mathe¬ 
matics, and has become of basic importance in the study of the logical 
and philosophical foundations of mathematics. The point of departure 
is the general concept of a set or aggregate. By this is meant any collec¬ 
tion of objects defined by some rule which specifies exactly which ob¬ 
jects belong to the given collection. As examples we may consider the 
set of all positive integers, the set of all periodic decimals, the set of 
all real numbers, or the set of all straight lines in three-dimensional space. 

For comparing the ^^magnitude'' of two different sets the basic notion 
is that of ‘‘equivalence.^’ If the elements in two sets A and B may be 
paired with each other in such a way that to each element of A there 
corresponds one and only one element of B and to each element of B 
corresponds one and only one element of A, then the correspondence 
is said to be biuniqm and A and B are said to be equivalent. The notion 
of equivalence for finite sets coincides with the ordinary notion of 
equality of number^ since two finite sets have the same number of elements 
if and only if the elements of the two sets can be put into biunique 
correspondence. This is in fact the very idea of counting, for when we 
count a finite set of objects, we simply establish a biunique correspond¬ 
ence between these objects and a set of number symbols 1, 2, 3, • • • , n. 

It is not always necessary to count the objects in two finite sets to establish 
their equivalence. For example, we can assert without counting that any finite 
set of circles of radius 1 is equivalent to the set of their centers. 

Cantor’s idea was to extend the concept of equivalence to infinite sets 
in order to define an “arithmetic” of infinities. The set of all real 
numbers and the set of all points on a straight line are equivalent, since 
the choice of an origin and a unit allows us to associate in a biunique 
manner with every point P of the line a definite real number x as its 
coordinate: 

P ^x. 

The even integers form a proper subset of the set of all integers, and 
the integers form a proper subset of the set of all rational numbers. (By 
the phrase proper subset of a set S, we mean a set S' consisting of some, 
but not all, of the objects in S.) Clearly, if a set is finite, i.e. if it contains 



FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS 


79 


some number n of elements and no more, then it cannot be equivalent to 
any one of its proper subsets^ since any proper subset could contain at 
most n — 1 elements. But, if a set contains infinitely many objects^ 
then, paradoxically enough, it may be equivalent to a proper subset oi 
itself. For example, the co6rdination 

1 2 3 4 6***w*** 

1 I I X t I 

2 4 6 8 10 • • • 2/1 • • • 

establishes a biunique correspondence between the set of positive integers 
and the proper subset of even integers^ which are thereby shown to be 
equivalent. This contradiction to the familiar truth, 'The whole is 
greater than any of its parts,shows what surprises are to be expected 
in the domain of the infinite. 

2. The Denumerability of the Rational Numbers and 
the Non-Denumerability of the Continuum 

One of Cantor’s first discoveries in his analysis of the infinite was that 
the set of rational numbers (which contains the infinite set of integers 
as a subset and is therefore itself infinite) is equivalent to the set of 
integers. At first sight it seems very strange that the dense set of 
rational numbers should be on the same footing as its sparsely sown sub¬ 
set of integers. True, one cannot arrange the positive rational numbers 
in order of size (as one can the integers) by saying that a is the first 
rational number, b the next larger, and so forth, because there are in¬ 
finitely many rational numbers between any two given ones, and hence 
there is no "next larger.” But, as Cantor observed, by disregarding 
the relation of magnitude between successive elements, it is possible to 
arrange all the rational numbers in a single row, ri, r 2 , rs, ri, • • •, like 
that of the integers. In this sequence there will be a first rational 
number, a second, a third, and so forth, and every rational number will 
appear exactly once. Such an arrangement of a set of objects in a 
sequence like that of the integers is called* a denumeration of the set. 
By exhibiting such a denumeration Cantor showed the set of rational 
numbers to be equivalent with the set of integers, since the cor¬ 
respondence 

1 2 3 

I I I I X 

ri r2 rz r4 • • • fn • • • 

is biunique. One way of denumerating the rational numbers will now be 
described. 



80 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


Every rational number can be written in the form a/b, where a and b 
are integers, and all these numbers can be put in an array, with a/b in 
the ath column and bth row. For example, 3/4 is found in the third 
column and fourth row of the table below. All the positive rational 
numbers may now be arranged according to the following scheme: in 
the array just defined we draw a continuous, broken line that goes 
through all the numbers in the array. Starting at 1, we go horizontally 
to the next place on the right, obtaining 2 as the second member of the 
sequence, then diagonally down to the left until the first column is 
reached at the position occupied by 1/2, then vertically down one place 
to 1/3, diagonally up until the first row is reached again at 3, across to 
4, diagonally down to 1 /4, and so on, as shown in the figure. Travelling 
along this broken line we arrive at a sequence 1, 2, 1/2, 1/3, 2/2, 3, 4, 
3/2, 2/3, 1/4, 1/5, 2/4, 3/3, 4/2, 5, • • • containing the rational numbers 
in the order in which they occur along the broken line. In this sequence 
we now cancel all those numbers a/b for which a and b have a common 
factor, so that each rational number r will appear exactly once and in 
its simplest form. Thus we obtain a sequence 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7.. 

J t I i I § 5 .. 

i 2 3 4 6 0 7 

7 Iff 7 ^ 7 • 

i i { i { i i •• 

i i f i I f 7 • • 

W I * I t ^ 

Fig. 19. Denumeratioo of the rational numbers. 

2,1/2,1/3,3,4,3/2, 2/3,1/4,1/5,5, • • • which contains each positive 
rational number once and only once. This shows that the set of all 
positive rational numbers is denumerable. In view of the fact that the 
rational numbers correspond in a biunique manner with the rational 
points on a line, we have proved at the same time that the set of posi¬ 
tive rational points on a line is denumerable. 

Exercises: 1) Show that the set of all positive and negative integers is de¬ 
numerable. Show that the set of all positive and negative rational numbers is 
denumerable. 





DENUMERABILITY OF RATIONAL NUMBERS 


81 


2) Show that the set 8 -f T (see p. 110) is denumerable if S and T are denumer¬ 
able sets. Show the same for the sum of three, four, or any number, n, of sets, 
and finally for a set composed of denumerably many denumerable sets. 

Since the rational numbers have been shown to be denumerable, one 
might suspect that any infinite set is denumerable, and that this is the 
ultimate result of the analysis of the infinite. This is far from being 
the case. Cantor made the very significant discovery that the set of all 
real numbers, rational and irrational, is not denumerable. In other words, 
the totality of real numbers presents a radically different and, so to 
speak, higher type of infinity than that of the integers or of the rational 
numbers alone. Cantor’s ingenious indirect proof of this fact has be¬ 
come a model for many mathematical demonstrations. The outline of 
the proof is as follows. We start with the tentative assumption that all 
the real numbers have actually been denumerated in a sequence, and 
then we exhibit a number which does not occur in the assumed denumera¬ 
tion. This provides a contradiction, since the assumption was that all 
the real numbers were included in the denumeration, and this assump¬ 
tion must be false if even one number has been left out. Thus the as¬ 
sumption that a denumeration of the real numbers is possible is shown 
to be untenable, and hence the opposite, i.e. Cantor’s statement that 
the set of real numbers is not denumerable, is shown to be true. 

To carry out this program, let us suppose that we have denumerated 
all the real numbers by arranging them in a table of infinite decimals, 

1st number Ni . aiaiazaia^ • • • 

2nd number Ni. bibzbzhjbz • • • 

3rd number Nz. ciCzCzCiCi • • 


where the AT’s denote the integral parts and the small letters denote the 
digits after the decimal point. We assume that this sequence of decimal 
fractions contains all the real numbers. The essential point in the proof 
is now to construct by a ^^diagonal process” a new number which we can 
show to be not included in this sequence. To do this we first choose a 
digit a which differs from ai and is neither 0 nor 9 (to avoid possible 
ambiguities which may arise from equalities like 0.999 ... == 1.000 • • •); 
then a digit b different from bz and again unequal to 0 or 9, similarly c 
different from Cz , and so on. (For example, we might simply choose 
a = 1 unless ai == 1, in which case we choose a = 2, and similarly down 





NUMBER SYSTEM OP MATHEMATICS 


[ID 


the table for all the digits 6, c, d, e, ... .) Now consider the infinite 
decimal 

z * Q.ahcde • • • . 

This new number z is certainly different from any one of the numbers 
in the table abgve; it cannot be equal to the first because it differs 
from it in the first digit after the decimal point; it cannot be equal to the 
second since it differs from it in the second digit; and, in general, it 
cannot be identical with the nth number in the table since it differs 
from it in the nth digit. This shows that our table of consecutively 
arranged decimals does not contain all the real numbers. Hence this set 
is not denumerable. 

The reader may perhaps imagine that the reason for the non¬ 
denumerability of the number continuum lies in the fact that the straight 
line is infinite in extent, and that a finite segment of the line would 
contain only a denumerable infinity of points. This is not the case, for 




Fig. 20 Fig 21 

Fig. 20. Biunique oorrespondenoe between the points of a bent segment and a whole straight line. 
Fig. 21. Biunique correspondence between the points of two segments of different length. 


it is easy to show that the entire number continuum is equivalent to 
any finite segment, say the segment from 0 to 1 with the endpoints 
excluded. The desired biunique correspondence may be obtained by 
bending the segment at i and | and projecting from a point, as shown 
in Figure 20. It follows that even a finite segment of the number 
axis contains a non-denumerable infinity of points. 

Exercise: Show that any interval [A, B] of the number axis is equivalent to 
any other interval [C, D], 

It is worthwhile to indicate another and perhaps more intuitive proof 
of the non-denumerability of the number continuum. In view of what 
we have just proved it will be sufficient to confine our attention to the 
set of points between 0 and 1. Again the proof is indirect. Let us 


DENUMERABILITY OF RATIONAL NUMBERS 


83 


suppose that the set of all points on the line between 0 and 1 can be ar¬ 
ranged in a sequence 

(1) ai) as) aa, • • • . 

Let us enclose the point with coordinate ai in an interval of length 
1/10, the point with coordinate Os in an interval of length 1/10^ and so 
on. If all points between 0 and 1 were included in the sequence (1), 
the unit interval would be entirely covered by an infinite sequence of 
possibly overlapping subintervals of lengths 1/10, 1/10*, ••• . (The 
fact that some of these extend beyond the unit interval does not influ¬ 
ence our proof.) The sum of these lengths is given by the geometric 
series 


1/10 + 1 / 10 * + 1 / 10 * + 


10 


1 - 


10 


1 

9* 


Thus the assumption that the sequence (1) contains all real numbers 
from 0 to 1 leads to the possibility of covering the whole of an interval 
of length 1 by a set of intervals of total length 1/9, which is intuitively 
absurd. We might accept this contradiction as a proof, although from 
a logical point of view it would require fuller analysis. 


The reasoning of the preceding paragraph serves to establish a theorem of 
great importance in the modern theory of “measure**. Replacing the intervals 
above by smaller intervals of length c/lO**, where e is an arbitrary small positive 
number, we see that any denumerable set of points on the line can be included 
in a set of intervals of total length </9. Since c was arbitrary, the latter number 
can be made as small as we please. In the terminology of measure theory we say 
that a denumerable set of points has the measure zero. 

Exercise: Prove that the same result holds for a denumerable set of points 
in the plane, replacing lengths of intervals by areas of squares. 


3. Cantor’s “Cardinal Numbers” 

In summary of the results thus far: The number of elements in a 
finite set A cannot equal the number of elements in a finite set B 
if A contains more elements than B, If we replace the concept of “sets 
with the same (finite) number of elements” by the more general concept 
of equivalent sets, then with infinite sets the previous statement does 
not hold; the set of all integers contains more elements than the set of 
even integers, and the set of rational numbers more than the set of in¬ 
tegers, but we have seen that these sets are equivalent. One might 
suspect that all infinite sets are equivalent and that distinctions other 
than that between finite numbers and infinity could not be made, but 



84 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


Cantor's result disproves this; there is a set, the real number continuum, 
which is not equivalent to any denumerable set. 

Thus there are at least two different types of ‘^infinity," the denumer¬ 
able infinity of the integers and the non-denumerable infinity of the 
continuum. If two sets A and B, finite or infinite, are equivalent, we 
shall say that they have the same cardinal number. This reduces to the 
ordinary notion of same natural number if A and B are finite, and may 
be regarded as a valid generalization of this concept. Moreover, if a 
set A is equivalent with some subset of B, while B is not equivalent to 
A or to any of its subsets, we shall say, following Cantor, that the set 
B has a greater cardinal number than the set A, This use of the word 
“number" also agrees with the ordinary notion of greater number for 
finite sets. The set of integers is a subset of the set of real numbers, 
while the set of real numbers is neither equivalent to the set of integers 
nor to any subset of it (i.e. the set of real numbers is neither denumerable 
nor finite). Hence, according to our definition, the continuum of real 
numbers has a greater cardinal number than the set of integers. 

♦As a matter of fact, Cantor actually showed how to construct a whole sequence 
of infinite sets with greater and greater cardinal numbers. Since we may start 
with the set of positive integers, it clearly suffices to show that given any set A 
it is possible to construct another set B with a greater cardinal number. Because 
of the great generality of this theorem, the proof is necessarily somewhat abstract. 
We define the set B to be the set whose elements are all the different subsets of 
the set A, By the word ^^subset’* we shall include not only the proper subsets 
of A but also the set A itself, and the empty ‘^subset” 0, containing no elements 
at all. (Thus, if A consists of the three integers 1, 2, 3, then B contains the 8 
different elements {1, 2, 3}, (1, 2), (1, 31, {2, 3}, (Ij, (2), {31, and 0.) Each 
element of the set B is itself a «e(, consisting of certain elements of A. Now 
suppose that B is equivalent to A or to some subset of it, i.e. that there is some 
rule which correlates in a biunique manner the elements of A or of a subset of 
A with all the elements of B, i.e. with the subsets of A: 

( 2 ) 0 4 —> 8 . , 

where we denote by Sm the subset of 1 corresponding to the element a of A. We 
shall arrive at a contradiction by exhibiting an element of B (i.e. a subset T of A) 
which cannot have any element a correlated with it. In order to construct this 
subset we observe that for any element x of A two possibilities exist: either the 
set Sx assigned to x in the given correspondence (2) contains the element x, or 
Sx does not contain x. We define T as the subset of A consisting of all those elements x 
such that Sx does not contain x. This subset differs from every Sa by at least the 
element o, since if Sm contains a, T does not, while if Sa does not contain a, T does. 
Hence T is not included in the correspondence (2). This shows that it ts im- 



CANTOR’S "CARDINAL NUMBERS" 


85 


poBsible to set up a biunique correspondence between the elements of A or of 
any subset of A and those of B. But the correlation 

a i -> [a] 

defines a biunique correspondence between the elements of A and the subset of B 
consisting of all one-element subsets of A. Hence, by the definition of the last 
paragraph, B has a greater cardinal number than A. 

* Exercise: If A contains n elements, where n is a positive integer, show that J5, 
defined as above, contains 2" elements. If A consists of the set of all positive 
integers, show that B is equivalent to the continuum of real numbers from 0 to 1. 
(Hint: Symbolize a subset of A in the first case by a finite and in the second 
case by an infinite sequence of the symbols 0 and 1, 

Ctldidt • • •'» 

where an = 1 or 0, according as the nth element of A does or does not belong to 
the given subset.) 

One might think it a simple matter to find a set of points with a greater cardinal 
number than the set of real numbers from 0 to 1. Certainly a square, being 
“two-dimensional,*’ would appear to contain “more” points than a “one-dimen- 
eional” segment. Surprisingly enough, this is not so; the cardinal number of the 
set of points in a square is the same as the cardinal number of the set of points on a 
segment. To prove this we set up the following correspondence. 

If (x, y) is a point of the unit square, x and y may be written in decimal form as 

X = 0.aia2a3a4 ••• f 

y = O.bibtbzbi • ‘, 

where to avoid ambiguity we choose, for example, 0.250000 • • • instead of 
0.249999 • • • for the rational number i. To the point {x, y) of the square we then 
assign the point 

z = 0.aibia2biatbiaibi ••• 

of the segment from 0 to 1. Clearly, different points (x, y) and (x’, y') of the 
square will correspond to different points z and z' of the segment, so that the 
cardinal number of the square cannot exceed that of the segment. 

(As a matter of fact, the correspondence just defined is biunique between the 
set of all points of the square and a proper subset of the unit segment; no point 
of the square could correspond to the point 0.2140909090 • • • , for example, since 
the form 0.25000 • • • rather than 0.24999 • • • was chosen for the number i. But 
it is possible to modify the correspondence slightly so that it will be biunique 
between the whole square and the whole segment, which are thus seen to have 
the same cardinal number.) 

A similar argument shows that the cardinal number of the points in a cube is 
no greater than the cardinal number of the segment. 

Although these results seem to contradict the intuitive notion of dimen¬ 
sionality, we must remember that the correspondence we have defined is not 
“continuous”; if we travel along the segment from 0 to 1 continuously, the corre¬ 
sponding points in the square will not form a continuous curve but will appear 



86 NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS [ IIJ 

in a completely chaotic order. The dimension of a set of points depends not 
only on the cardinal number of the set, but also on the manner in which the 
points are distributed in space. In Chapter V we shall return to this subject. 

4. The Indirect Method of Proof 

The theory of cardinal numbers is but one aspect of the general 
theory of sets, created by Cantor in the face of severe criticism by 
some of the most distinguished mathematicians of the time. Many of 
these critics, such as Kronecker and Poincar4, objected to the vague¬ 
ness of the general concept of ''set,'' and to the non-constructive char¬ 
acter of the reasoning used to define certain sets. 

The objections to non-constructive reasoning refer to what may be 
called essentially indirect proofs. Indirect proofs themselves are a 
familiar sort of mathematical reasoning: to establish the truth of a 
statement A, one makes the tentative assumption that A\ the contrary 
of i4, is true. Then by some chain of reasoning one produces a con¬ 
tradiction to A\ thus demonstrating the absurdity of A\ Hence, on 
the basis of the fundamental logical principle of the ^^excluded middle,” 
the absurdity of A' establishes the truth of A. 

Throughout this book we shall meet with examples where an indirect 
proof can easily be converted into a direct proof, though the indirect 
form of proof often has the advantages of brevity and freedom from 
details not necessary for the immediate objective. But there are some 
theorems for which it has not yet been possible to give other than in¬ 
direct proofs. There are even theorems, provable by the indirect 
method, for which direct constructive proofs could not possibly be given 
even in principle, because ,of the very nature of the theorems them¬ 
selves. Such, for example, is the theorem on page 81. On different 
occasions in the history of mathematics, when the efforts of mathema¬ 
ticians were directed towards constructing solutions for certain problems 
in order to show their solvability, someone else came along and side¬ 
stepped the task of construction by giving an indirect and non-construc¬ 
tive proof. 

There is an essential difference between proving the existence of an 
object of a certain type by constructing a tangible example of such an 
object, and showing that if none existed one could deduce contradictory 
results. In the first case one has a tangible object, while in the second 
case one has only the contradiction. Some distinguished mathema¬ 
ticians have recently advocated the more or less complete banishment 
from mathematics of all non-constructive proofs. Even if such a 
program were desirable, it would at present involve tremendous com- 



INDIRECT METHOD OF PROOF 


87 


plication and even the partial destruction of the body of living mathe¬ 
matics. For this reason it is no wonder that the school of “intui- 
tionism/' which has adopted this program, has met with strong resistance, 
and that even the most thoroughgoing intuitionists cannot always live 
up to their convictions. 

5. The Paradoxes of the Infinite 

Although the uncompromising position of the intuitionists is far too 
extreme for most 'mathematicians, a serious threat to the beautiful 
theory of infinite aggregates arose when outright logical paradoxes in 
the theory became apparent. It was soon observed that unrestricted 
freedom in using the concept of ‘‘set^' must lead to contradiction. One 
of the paradoxes, exhibited by Bertrand Russell, may be formulated 
as follows. Most sets do not contain themselves as elements. For 
example, the set A of all integers contains as elements only integers; A, 
being itself not an integer but a set of integers, does not contain itself as 
element. Such a set we may call ‘'ordinary.^' There may possibly be 
sets which do contain themselves as elements; for example, the set S 
defined as follows: contains as elements all sets definable by an 

English phrase of less than twenty words'^ could be considered to con¬ 
tain itself as an element. Such sets we might call ^^extraordinary” sets. 
In any case, however, most sets will be ordinary, and we may exclude 
the erratic behavior of ^^extraordinary” sets by confining our attention 
to the set of all ordinary sets. Call this set C, Each element of the set 
C is itself a set; in fact an ordinary set. The question now arises, is C 
itself an ordinary set or an extraordinary set? It must be one or the 
other. If C is ordinary, it contains itself as an element, since C is de¬ 
fined as containing all ordinary sets. This being so, C must be extra¬ 
ordinary, since the extraordinary sets are those containing themselves 
as members. This is a contradiction. Hence C must be extraordinary. 
But then C contains as a member an extraordinary set (namely C itself), 
which contradicts the definition whereby C was to contain ordinary sets 
only. Thus in either case we see that the assumption of the mere exist¬ 
ence of the set C has led us to a contradiction. 

6. The Foundations of Mathematics 

Paradoxes like this have led Russell and others to a systematic study 
of the foundations of mathematics and logic. The ultimate aim of 
their efforts is to provide for mathematical reasoning a logical basis 
which can be shown to be free from possible contradiction, and which 



88 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


(III 


still covers everything that is considered important by all (or some) 
mathematicians. While this ambitious goal has not been attained and 
perhaps cannot ever be attained, the subject of mathematical logic has 
attracted the attention of increasing numbers of students. Many 
problems in this field which can be stated in very simple terms are very 
difficult to solve. As an example, we mention the Hypothesis of the 
Continuum^ which states that there is no set whose cardinal number is 
greater than that of the set of the integers but less than that of the set 
of real numbers. Many interesting consequences can be deduced from 
this hypothesis, but up to now it has neither been proved nor disproved, 
though it has recently been shown by Kurt Godel that if the usual 
postulates at the basis of set theory are consistent, then the enlarged 
set of postulates obtained by adding the Hypothesis of the Continuum 
is also consistent. Questions such as this ultimately reduce to the ques¬ 
tion of what is meant by the concept of mathematical existence. Luckily, 
the existence of mathematics does not depend on a satisfactory answer. 
The school of ^Tormalists,^' led by the great mathematician Hilbert, 
asserts that in mathematics ^^existence^^ simply means ^‘freedom from 
contradiction.It then becomes necessary to construct a set of postu¬ 
lates from which all of mathematics can be deduced by purely formal 
reasoning, and to show that this set of postulates will never lead to a 
contradiction. Recent results by Godel and others seem to show that 
this program, at least as originally conceived by Hilbert, cannot be 
carried out. Significantly, Hilbert^s theory of the formalized structure 
of mathematics is essentially based on intuitive procedure. In some 
way or other, openly or hidden, even under the most uncompromising 
formalistic, logical, or postulational aspect, constructive intuition always 
remains the vital element in mathematics. 

§5. COMPLEX NUMBERS 
1. The Origin of Complex Numbers 

For many reasons the concept of number has had to be extended even 
beyond the real number continuum by the introduction of the so-called 
complex numbers. One must realize that in the historical and psycho¬ 
logical development of mathematics, all these extensions and new inven¬ 
tions were by no means the products of some one individuars efforts. 
They appear rather as the outcome of a gradual and hesitant evolution 
for which no single person can receive major credit. It was the need 
for more freedom in formal calculations that brought about the use of 
negative and rational numbers. Only at the end of the middle ages 



ORIGIN OF COMPLEX NUMBERS 


89 


did mathematicians begin to lose their feeling of uneasiness in using 
these concepts, which did not appear to have the same intuitive and 
concrete character as do the natural numbers. It was not until the 
middle of the nineteenth century that mathematicians fully realized 
that the essential logical and philosophical basis for operating in an ex¬ 
tended number domain is formalistic; that extensions have to be created 
by definitions which, as such, are free, but which are useless if not 
made in such a way that the prevailing rules and properties of the 
original domain are preserved in the larger domain. That the^e exten¬ 
sions may sometimes be linked with ‘‘reaF' objects and in this way 
provide tools for new applications is of the highest importance, but this 
can provide only a motivation and not a logical proof of the validity 
of the extension. 

The process which first requires the use of complex numbers is that 
of solving quadratic equations. We recall the concept of the linear equa¬ 
tion, ax — b, where the unknown quantity x is to be determined. The 
solution is simply x = b/a, and the requirement that every linear 
equation with integral coefficients a 9 ^ Q and b shall have a solution ne¬ 
cessitated the introduction of the rational numbers. Equations such as 

( 1 ) = 2 , 

which has no solution x in the field of rational numbers, led us to con¬ 
struct the wider field of real numbers in which a solution does exist. 
But even the field of real numbers is not wide enough to provide a com¬ 
plete theory of quadratic equations. A simple equation like 

( 2 ) 

has no real solution, since the square of any real number is never 
negative. 

We must either be content with the statement that this simple equa¬ 
tion is not solvable, or follow the familiar path of extending our concept 
of number by introducing numbers that will make the equation 
solvable. This is exactly what is done when we introduce the new 
symbol i by defining i* = — 1. Of course this object z, the ^^imaginary 
unit,’^ has nothing to do with the concept of a number as a means of 
counting. It is purely a symbol^ subject to the fundamental rule = — 1, 
and its value will depend entirely on whether by this introduction a 
really useful and workable extension of the number system can be 
effected. 

Since we wish to add and multiply with the symbol i as with an or¬ 
dinary real number, we should be able to form symbols like 2i, 3f, — f. 



90 


KUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


III] 


2 + 5i, or more generally, a + bi, where a and b are any two real num¬ 
bers. If these symbols are to obey the familiar commutative, associa¬ 
tive, and distributive laws of addition and multiplication, then, for 
example, 

(2 + 3t) + (1 + 4t) = (2 -1- 1) -h (3 + 4)f = 3 + 7i, 

(2 + 3i)(l 4i) = 2 + 8 i + 3i + 12i* 

= (2 - 12) + (8 + 3)f = -10 + Ilf. 

Guided by these considerations we begin our systematic exposition 
by making the following definition: A symbol of the form o -t- bi, where 
a and b are any two real numbers, shall be called a complex number 
with real part a and imaginary part b. The operations of addition 
and multiplication shall be performed with these symbols just as though 
i were an ordinary real number, except that i* shall always be replaced 
by —1. More precisely, we define addition and multiplication of com¬ 
plex numbers by the rules 

(o + bi) "h (c -|- di) = (a c) -h (I> "h d)i, 

(3) 

(o + bi){c + di) = (ac — bd) -f {ad + bc)i. 

In particular, we have 

(4) (a -|- bi){a — bi) = o* — abi + abi — = o* -|- 6*. 

On the basis of these definitions it is easily verified that the commuta¬ 
tive, associative, and distributive laws hold for complex numbers. 
Moreover, not only addition and multiplication, but also subtraction 
and division of two complex numbers lefid again to numbers of the 
form o -f- W, so that the complex numbers form afield (see p. 56): 

(o + bi) — (c + di) = (o — c) (6 — d)i, 

a + bi _ (o + bi) (c — di) _ /ac + bd\ , Ac — ad\ . 
c + di (c -f- di) {c — di) \ c* -f cP / "^ \ c* -|- d* / ' 

(The second equation is meaningless when c -f di = 0 + Of, for then 
c* d* = 0. So again m must exdude division by zero, i.e. by 0 + Of.) 
For example, 

(2 + 3f) - (1 + 4f) = 1 - f, 

2 “h 3f_2 -|- 3f 1 — 4f_2 — 8f -|- 3f -|- 12 14 5 . 

mi “ rr^'i - 4f me * it “ i?*' 



ORIGIN OF COMPLEX NUMBERS 


91 


The field of complex numbers includes the field of real numbers as a 
subfield, for the complex number a + Oi is regarded as the same as 
the real number a. On the other hand, a complex number of the form 
0 + = bi is called a pure imaginary number. 


Exercises: 1) Express 


(1+0(2 + 0(3 4-0 
(1 - 0 


2) Express 


in the form a + hi. 



in the form a + bi. 

3) Express in the form a + bi: 


1 +t 1 + t 1 _1_ (4 - 50« 

1 - i * 2 - t' (- 2 + 0(1 - 30 * (2 - 30* ‘ 


4) Calculate \/5 + 12i. (Hint: Write \/5 + 12i == x + t/i, square, and equate 
real and imaginary parts.) 


By the introduction of the symbol i we have extended the field of real 
numbers to a field of symbols a + bi in which the special quadratic 
equation 

= -1 

has the two solutions x = i and x = — z. For by definition, 
i.i = = — + In reality we have gained much more; 

we can easily verify that now every quadratic equation^ which we may 
write in the form 

(6) ax^ + bx + c = 0, 

has a solution. For from (6) we have 



^ I b _ iky/b^ — 4ac 
* ^ 2o ’ 

—b ± \/b* — 4oc 

* 



92 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[11] 


Now if — 4ac > 0, then \/62 4 ^^ is ordinary real number, and 

the solutions (7) are real, while if 6 * — 4ac < 0, then 4ac — > 0 

and y/b^ — 4ac = V — ( 4 ac — b^) = y/4ac — so that the solutions 
(7) are complex numbers. For example, the solutions of the equation 

a:' - 5a: + 6 = 0 

are x = (5 db ^^25 — 24)/2 = (5 ± l )/2 = 2 or 3, while the solutions 
of the equation 

x" - 2 x + 2 = 0 , 

are X = (2 db \/4 — 8)/2 = (2 ±: 2i)/2 = 1 + i or 1 — 

2. The Geometrical Interpretation of Complex Numbers 

As early as the sixteenth century mathematicians were compelled 
to introduce expressions for square roots of negative numbers in order 
to solve all quadratic and cubic equations. But they were at a loss to 
explain the exact meaning of these expressions, which they regarded 
with superstitious awe. The name “imaginary^^ is a reminder of 
the fact that these expressions were considered to be somehow fictitious 
and unreal. Finally, early in the nineteenth century, when the im¬ 
portance of these numbers in many branches of mathematics had 
become manifest, a simple geometric interpretation of the operations 
with complex numbers was provided which set to rest the lingering 
doubts about their validity. Of course, such an interpretation is 
unnecessary from the modern point of view in which the justification 
of formal calculations with complex numbers is given directly on the 
basis of the formal definitions of addition and multiplication. But the 
geometric interpretation, given at about the same time by Wessel 
(1745-1818), Argand (1768-1822) and Gauss, made these operations 
seem more natural from an intuitive standpoint, and has ever since 
been of the utmost importance in applications of complex numbers in 
mathematics and the physical sciences. 

This geometrical interpretation consists simply in representing the 
complex number z = z + yihy the point in the plane with rectangular 
coordinates x, y. Thus the real part of z is its x-co 6 rdinate, and the 
imaginary part is its 2/“COordinate. A correspondence is thereby estab¬ 
lished between the complex numbers and the points in a “number 
plane,^' just as a correspondence was established in §2 between the 
real numbers and the points on a line, the number axis. The points on 
the x-axis of the number plane correspond to the real numbers 



GEOME'rRICAL INTERPRETATION 


93 


2 = X + Oz, while the points on the 2 /-axis correspond to the pure 
imaginary numbers z = 0 + yi. 


If 


z — X + yi 

is any complex number, we call the complex number 

z = X — yi 

the conjxigate of z. The point z is represented in the number plane by 
the reflection of the point z in the x-axis as in a mirror. If we denote 



Fig. 22. Geometrical representation of complex numbers. The point c baa the rectangular coordinates x, y 


the distance of the point z from the origin by p, then by the Pythagorean 
theorem 

+ 2 /^ = + yi){x - yi) = z-z. 

The real number p — y/+ x/ is called the modulus of z, and written 

p = \z\. 

If z lies on the real axis, its modulus is its ordinary absolute value. The 
complex numbers with modulus 1 lie on the “unit circle^^ with center 
at the origin and radius 1. 

7f I z I = 0 then z = 0. This follows from the definition of 1 2 | as 
the distance of z from the origin. Moreover the modulus of the 'product 
of two complex numbers is equal to the product of their moduli: 

\Zl-Zi \ = \ zi\-\zt\. 

This will follow from a more general theorem to be proved on page 95. 

Exercises: 1. Prove this theorem directly from the definition of multiplication 
of two complex numbers, 2i ■» + yd and 2a « xj + yd- 




94 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


HI) 


2. From the fact that the product of two real numbers is 0 only if one of the 
factors is 0, prove the corresponding theorem for complex numbers. (Hint: Use 
the two theorems just stated.) 

From the definition of addition of two complex numbers, + yii 

and z% — x% + yiif we have 

zi + Z 2 = (xi + X 2 ) + (yi + ^ 2 )^. 

Hence the point Zi + Z 2 ia represented in the number plane by the 
fourth vertex of a parallelogram, three of whose vertices are the 



Fig. 23. Parallelogram law of addition of complex numbert. 

points 0, Zi, Z 2 , This simple geometrical construction for the sum of 
two complex numbers is of great importance in many applications. 
From it we can deduce the important consequence that the modulus 
of the sum of two complex numbers does not exceed the sum of the moduli 
(compare p. 68): 

\Zi+ Zll < \ Zi \ + \ Zi\- 

This follows from the fact that the length of any side of a triangle 
cannot exceed the sum of the lengths of the other two sides. 

Exercise: When does the equality | 2i -f- 22 | =■ | 21 | + 1 22 | hold? 

The angle between the positive direction of the x-axis and the line 
Oz is called the angle of and is denoted by <l> (Fig. 22). The modulus 
of 2 is the same as the modulus of z, 

Ml == hi. 

but the angle of 2 is the negative of the angle of 2 , 

Of course, the angle of z is not uniquely determined, since any integral 
multiple of 360® can be added to or subtracted from an angle without 




GEOMETRICAL INTERPRETATION 


95 


affecting the position of its terminal side. Thus 

0, 0 + 360®, 0 + 720®, 0 + 1080®, .. • , 

0 - 360®, 0 - 720®, 0 - 1080®, • • • 

all represent graphically the same angle. By means of the modulus p 
and the angle 0, the complex number z can be written in the form 

(8) 2 = a: + yi = p(cos 0 + i sin 0); 

for, by the definition of sine and cosine (see p. 277), 

X = p cos 0, y = p sin 0. 

E.g. for 2 = t, p = 1, 0 = 90®, so that i = 1 (cos 90® + i sin 90®); 


for 

z = 1 + t, 

p = V 2 , 0 = 45®, BO that 


1 + * 

= V 2 (cos 45° + i sin 45°); 

for 

z = 1 — 

p = V^( ^ = —45°, so that 


1 — i = 

V 2 [cos (—45°) + i sin (—45°)]; 

for 

z = -1 + Vs i 

, p = 2, 4> = 120°, so that 


-1 + \/3 t = 2 (cos 120® + i sin 120®). 

The reader should confirm these statements by substituting the values 
of the trigonometrical functions. 

The trigonometrical representation (8) is of great value when two 
complex numbers are to be multiplied. If 

z = p(cos 0 + i sin 0), 
and z' = p'(cos 0' + i sin 0'), 

then zz' = pp' {(cos 0 cos 0' — sin 0 sin 0') 

+ t(cos 0 sin 0' + sin 0 cos 0')} 
Now, by the fundamental additton theorems for the sine and cosine, 
cos 0 cos 0' — sin 0 sin 0' = cos (0 + 0'), 
cos 0 sin 0' + sin 0 cos 0' = sin (0 + 0'). 

Hence 

(9) zz' = pp'fcos (0 + 0') + t sin (0 + 0')}. 

This is the trigonometrical form of the complex number with modulus 
pp' and angle 0 + 0'. In other words, to multiply two complex numbers^ 
we multiply their moduli and add their angles (Fig. 24). Thus we 



96 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


III 


see that multiplication of complex numbers has something to do with 
rotation. To be more precise, let us call the directed line segment 
pointing from the origin to the point z the vector z; then p = j 2 | will be 
its length. Let 2 ' be a number on the unit circle, so that p' = 1; then 
multiplying z by z' simply rotates the vector z through the angle 
If p' 1, the length of the vector has to be multiplied by p' after the 
rotation. The reader may illustrate these facts by multiplying various 
numbers by Zi = i (rotating by 90°); 22 = (rotating by 90° in the 
opposite sense); 23 = 1 + t; and 24 = 1 — i. 



Fig. 24. Multiplication oftwo complex numbers; the anglee are added and the moduli multiplied. 

Formula (9) has a particularly important consequence when 2 = 2 ', 
for then we have 

2 ^ = p*(cos 20 + r sin 20). 

Multiplying this result again by 2 we obtain 

2 * = p’(cos 30 + i sin 30), 
and continuing indefinitely in this way, 

(10) 2 ” = p'* (cos n0 + i sin n4>) for any integer n. 

In particular, if 2 is a point on the unit circle, with p = 1, we obtain 
the formula discovered by the English mathematician A. De Moivre 
(1667-1754): 

(11) (cos 0 + i sin 0)" = cos n0 + t sin n0. 



GEOMETRICAL INTERPRETATION 


97 


This formula is one of the most remarkable and useful relations in 
elementary mathematics. An example will illustrate this. We may 
apply the formula for n = 3 and expand the left hand side according 
to the binomial formula, 

{u “h v)* = u* 4" 4“ 3wv* 4“ 

obtaining the relation 

cos 3<^ 4- i sin 30 = cos* 0 — 3 cos 0 sin* 0 4“ t(3 cos* 0 sin 0 — sin* 0). 

A single equation such as this between two complex numbers amounts 
to a pair of equations between real numbers. For when two complex 
numbers are equal, both real and imaginary parts must be equal. Hence 
we may write 

cos 30 = cos* 0 — 3 cos 0 sin* 0, sin 30 = 3 cos* 0 sin 0 — sin* 0. 
Using the relation 

cos* 0 4“ sin* 0=1, 

we have finally 

cos 30 = cos* 0 — 3 cos 0(1 — cos* 0) = 4 cos* 0 — 3 cos 0, 
sin 30 = —4 sin* 0 4" 3 sin 0. 

Similar formulas, expressing sin n0 and cos n0 in terms of powers of 
sin 0 and cos 0 respectively, can easily be obtained for any value of n. 

Exercises: 1) Find the corresponding formulas for sin 40 and cos 40. 

2) Prove that for a point, z =* cos 0 -f- i sin 0, on the unit circle, 1/z = 
cos 0 — i sin 0. 

3) Prove without calculation that (a + 6i)/(o — bi) always has the absolute 
value 1. 

4) If Zi and Zt are two complex numbers prove that the angle of zi — Z 2 is equal 
to the angle between the real axis and the vector pointing from 22 to Zi . 

5) Interpret the angle of the complex number (zi — zi)l{zi — Zt) in the triangle 
formed by the points 21 , Za, and Zt . 

6) Prove that the quotient of two complex numbers with the same angle is real. 

Zt — Zi 

7) Prove that if for four complex numbers Zi , Za , 2 i , Z 4 the angles of - 

Z| — Za 

and — - — are the same, then the four numbers lie on a circle or on a straight 

Z4 - Za 

line, and conversely. 

8 ) Prove that four points 21 , 22 , 23 , Zi lie on a circle or on a straight line if 
and only if 



98 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


III) 


3. De Moivre’s Formula and the Roots of Unity 

By an nth root of a number a we mean a number h such that 6” = a. 
In particular, the number 1 has two square roots, 1 and —1, since 
1 * = (—1)* = 1. The number 1 has only one real cube root, 1, while 
it has four fourth roots: the real numbers 1 and — 1, and the imaginary 
numbers i and — i. These facts suggest that there may be two more 
cube roots of 1 in the complex domain, making a total of three in all. 
That this is the case may be shown at once from De Moivre’s formula. 



Fig. 25. The twelve twelfth roots of 1. 


We shall see that in the field of complex numbers there are exactly n 
different nth roots of 1. They are represented by the vertices of the regular 
n^sided polygon inscribed in the unit circle and having the point z = 1 as 
one of its vertices. This is almost immediately clear from Figure 25 
(drawn for the case n = 12). The first vertex of the polygon is 1. Thv.> 
next is 


( 12 ) 


360® , . . 360® 

a = cos-+ % sin-, 

n n 


since its angle must be the nth part of the total angle 360®. The next 
vertex is a-a = since we obtain it by rotating the vector a through 
360® 

the angle-. The next vertex is a®, etc., and finally, after n steps, 

n 

we are back at the vertex 1, i.e., we have 

a* - 1, 



DE MOIVRE’S FORMULA AND ROOTS OF UNITY 


which also follows from formula (11), since 


360® , . . 360®“!" 

cos-h t sm- 

_ n n _ 


cos 360® + i sin 360® = 1 + Ot. 


It follows that Of* = a is a root of the equation x" = 1. The same is 
true for the next vertex a = cos C-?) + i sin We can see 

this by writing 

(«) = « = (« ) = ( 1 ) = 1 , 

or from De Moivre’s formula: 

, / 720®\ , . . / 720®\ 

(a ) = cos In 1 + t sm I n 1 

= cos 720® + i sin 720® = 1 + Oi = 1. 


In the same way we see that all the n numbers 

1 2 3 n-1 

1, a, a , a , ... , a 

are nth roots of 1. To go farther in the sequence of exponents or to 
use negative exponents would yield no new roots. For = 1/a = 
a*/a = and a” = 1, a”^^ = (a)^a = l^a = a, etc., so that the 
previous values would simply be repeated. It is left as an exercise to 
show that there are no other nth roots. 

If n is even, then one of the vertices of the n-sided polygon will lie at 
the point — 1, in accordance with the algebraic fact that in this case — 1 
is an nth root of 1. 

The equation satisfied by the nth roots of 1 

(13) - 1 = 0 

is of the nth degree, but it can easily be reduced to an equation of the 
(n — l)st degree. We use the algebraic formula 

(14) x" - 1 = (x - l)(x""‘ + x"-* + x"-’ + ... + 1). 


Since the product of two numbers is 0 if and only if at least one of the 
two numbers is 0, the left hand side of (14) vanishes only if one of the 
two factors on the right hand side is zero, i.e. only if either a; = 1, or 
the equation 

(15) x"’* + x""* + x"-’ + ... + X + 1 ^ 0 

is satisfied. This, then, is the equation which must be satisfied by 
the roots a, a, ••• it is called the cyclotomic (circle-dividing) 



100 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


equation. For example, the complex cube roots of 1, 

a - COB 120* + t sin 120* = i(-l + * Vs), 
a = COB 240* + i sin 240* = K~1 ~ i \/3), 
are the roots of the equation 

+ X -f 1 = 0, 

as the reader will readily see by direct substitution. Likewise the fifth 
roots of 1, other than 1 itself, satisfy the equation 

(16) x' + X* + + X + 1 = 0. 

To construct a regular pentagon, we have to solve this fourth degree 
equation. By a simple algebraic device it can be reduced to a quadratic 
equation in the quantity w = x + 1/x. We divide (16) by x* and re¬ 
arrange the terms: 

x^ + 4* X + |. + 1 = 0, 

x^ X 

or, since (x + lA)^ = x^ + 1+ 2, we obtain the equation 

— 1 = 0 . 


By formula (7) of Article 1 this equation has the roots 


_ — 1 + \/5 
2 


W2 = 


-1 - V5 
2 


Hence the complex fifth roots of 1 are the roots of the two quadratic 
equations 

X = Wij or X* i(\/5 — I)® "b 1 ~ 0> 

X 

and 

X + - = w; 2 , or x^ — Ka/S + 1)^5 + 1 = 0, 

X 

which the reader may solve by the formula already used. 

Exercise: 1) Find the 6th roots of 1. 2) Find (1 -1- 

3) Find all the different values of \/l i, -^7 — 4t, v^^*. 

4) Calculate (»» - f'). 



FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ALGEBRA 


101 


*i. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra 

Not only is every equation of the form ax + bx c — 0 or of the form 
x'* — 1 = 0 solvable in the field of complex numbers, but far more is 
true: Every algebraic equation of any degree n with real or complex 
coefficients^ 

(17) f{x) = x" + an-\x''~^ + + • • • + aix + Oo = 0, 

has solutions in the field of complex numbers. For equations of the 3rd 
and 4th degrees this was established in the sixteenth century by Tar- 
taglia, Cardan, and others, who solved such equations by formulas es¬ 
sentially similar to that for the quadratic equation, although much more 
complicated. For almost two hundred years the general equations of 
5th and higher degree were intensively studied, l)ut all efforts to solve 
them by similar methods failed. It was a great achievement when the 
young Gauss in his doctoral thesis (1799) succeeded in giving the first 
complete proof that solutions exists although the question of generalizing 
the classical formulas, which express the solutions of equations of degree 
less than 5 in terms of the rational operations plus root extraction, re¬ 
mained unanswered at the time. (See p. 118.) 

Gauss’s theorem states that for any algebraic equation of the form (17), 
where n is a positive integer and the vJs are any real or even complex num- 
bers, there exists at least one complex number a = c + di such that 

f{a) = 0. 

The number a is called a root of the equation (17). A proof of this 
theorem will be given on page 269. Assuming its truth for the moment, 
we can prove what is known as the fundamental theorem of algebra (it 
should more fittingly be called the fundamental theorem of the complex 
number system): Every polynomial of degree n, 

(18) fix) = x” + . + aix + oo, 

can be factored into the product of exactly n factorsy 

(19) fix) = (x - ai)ix - a 2 ) • • • (a; - an), 

where on , ^2 , aa , • • • , an are complex numberSy the roots of the equation 
f(x) = 0. As an example illustrating this theorem, the polynomial 

fix) = X* - 1 

may be factored into the form 

fix) — (x — l)(x — t)(x + t)(x + 1). 



102 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


That the are roots of the equation f(x) = 0 is evident from the 
factorization (19), since for x == ar one factor of /(x), and hence /(x) 
itself, is equal to zero. 

In some cases the factors (x — ai), (x — a 2 ), • • • of a polynomial 
f(x) of degree n will not all be distinct, as in the example 

/(x) = X* — 2 x + 1 = (x — l)(x — 1 ), 

which has but one root, x = 1 , ‘^counted twice'^ or ‘'of multiplicity 2 ” 
In any case, a polynomial of degree n can have no more than n distinct 
factors (x — a) and the corresponding equation n roots. 

To prove the factorization theorem we again make use of the alge¬ 
braic identity 

(20) X* — a* = (x — a)(x*~^ + ax* ^ + a*x* * + • • • + a* *x + a* ^), 

which for a = 1 is merely the formula for the geometrical series. Since 
we are assuming the truth of Gauss’s theorem, we may suppose that 
a = ai is a root of equation (17), so that 

f(ai) = aj + an-iaf ^ + dn-^oti ^ • + ^lai + ao = 0. 

Subtracting this from /(x) and rearranging the terms, we obtain the 
identity 

( 21 ) /(x) = f(x) - /(aO = (x” - a?) + - a?'^) 

+ • • • + ai(x — ai). 

Now, because of (20), we may factor out (x — ai) from every term of 

( 21 ) , so that the degree of the other factor of each term is reduced by 1 . 
Hence, on rearranging the terms again, we find that 

/(x) = (x - ai)^(x), 

where g(x) is a polynomial of degree n — 1 : 

g(x) = x” ^ + 6 n~ 2 X*‘ *-!-••• + bix + 6 o. 

(For our purposes it is quite unnecessary to calculate the coefficients 
bk .) Now we may apply the same procedure to g{x). By Gauss’s 
theorem there exists a root a 2 of the equation g(x) = 0 , so that 

^(x) = (x - a 2 )A(x), 

where h(x) is a polynomial of degree n — 2. Proceeding a total of 
(n — 1 ) times in the same way (of course, this phrase is merely a sub¬ 
stitute for an argument by mathematical induction) we finally obtain 
the complete factorization 

(22) /(x) » (x - ai)(x - af)(x - oi) • • • (x - ««)• 



FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ALGEBRA 


103 


From (22) it follows not only that the complex numbers ai, a*, • • • , an 
are roots of the equation (17), but also that they are the only roots. For 
if y were a root of equation (17), then by (22) 

f{y) = (2/ “ CLi){y - oti) ••• {y - an) = 0. 

We have seen on page 94 that a product of complex numbers is equal to 
0 if and only if one of the factors is equal to 0. Hence one of the factors 
(y — otr) must be 0, and y must be equal to ar, as was to be shown. 

♦§6. ALGEBRAIC AND TRANSCENDENTAL 
NUMBERS 

1. Definition and Existence 

An algebraic number is any number x, real or complex, that satisfies 
some algebraic equation of the form 

(1) anx'^ + an-\X^ ^ + • • • + aiX + Oo = 0 (n > 1, 5^ 0) 

where the a* are integers. For example, \/2 is an algebraic number, 
since it satisfies the equation 

x' - 2 = 0. 

Similarly, any root of an equation with integer coefficients of third, 
fourth, fifth, or any higher degree, is an algebraic number, whether or 
not the roots can be expressed in terms of radicals. The concept of 
algebraic number is a natural generalization of rational number, which 
constitutes the special case when n = 1. 

Not every real number is algebraic. This may be shown by a proof, 
due to Cantor, that the totality of all algebraic numbers is denumerable. 
Since the set of all real numbers is non-denumerable, there must exist 
real numbers which are not algebraic. 

A method for denumerating the set of algebraic numbers is as follows: 
To each equation of the form (1) the positive integer 

= I Un 1 + 1 Un_l I + • • • + 1 ai I + I UO I + W 

is assigned as its ‘ffieight.^’ For any fixed value of h there are only a finite 
number of equations (1) with height h. Each of these equations can 
have at most n different roots. Therefore there can be but a finite 
number of algebraic numbers whose equations are of height A, and we* 
can arrange all the algebraic numbers in a sequence by starting with 
those of height 1, then taking those of height 2, and so on. 

This proof that the set of algebraic numbers is denumerable assures 



104 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


(III 


the existence of real numbers which are not algebraic; such numbers are 
called transcendental, for, as Euler said, they “transcend the power of 
algebraic methods.” 

Cantor’s proof of the existence of transcendental numbers can hardly 
be called constructive. Theoretically, one could construct a transcen¬ 
dental number by applying Cantor’s diagonal process to a denumerated 
table of decimal expressions for the roots of algebraic equations, but this 
procedure would be quite impractical and would not lead to any number 
whose expression in the decimal or any other system could actually be 
written down. Moreover, the most interesting problems concerning 
transcendental numbers lie in proving that certain definite numbers 
such as TT and e (these numbers will be defined on pages 297 and 299) 
are actually transcendental. 

'*‘*2. Liouville’s Theorem and the Construction of 
Transcendental Numbers 

A proof for the existence of transcendental numbers which antedates 
Cantor’s was given by J. Liouville (1809-1882). Liouville’s proof 
actually permits the construction of examples of such numbers. It is 
somewhat more difficult than Cantor’s proof, as are most constructions 
when compared with mere existence proofs. The proof is included here 
for the more advanced reader only, though it requires no more than 
high school mathematics. 

Liouville showed that irrational algebraic numbers are those which 
cannot be approximated by rational numbers with a very high degree 
of accuracy unless the denominators of the approximating fractions are 
quite large. 

Suppose the number « satisfies the algebraic equation with integer 
coefficients 

(2) fix) = oo -1- Oia: 4- oja:’ -1- •.. -f a^x" = 0 (o, 0), 

but no such equation of lower degree. Then z is said to be an algebraic 
number of degree n. For example, z = \/2 is an algebraic number of 
degree 2, since it satisfies the equation a:* — 2 = 0 but no equation of 
the first degree; z = is of the third degree because it satisfies the 
equation x* — 2 =■ 0 and, as we shall see in Chapter III, no equation 
of lower degree. An algebraic number of degree n > 1 cannot be 
rational, since a rational number z — 'pjq satisfies the equation 
gx — p = 0 of degree 1. Now each irrational number z can be ap- 



LIOUVILLE^S THEOREM 


105 


proximated to any desired degree of accuracy by a rational number; 
this means that we can find a sequence 

'92 ’ ‘ “ 

of rational numbers with larger and larger denominators such that 


Qr 


—> z. 


Liouville^s theorem asserts: For any algebraic number z of degree n > 1 
such an approximation must be less accurate than i.e., the 

inequality 


must hold for sufficiently large denominators q. 

We shall prove this theorem presently, but first we shall show how it 
permits the construction of transcendental numbers. Let us take the 
number (see p. 17 for the definition of the symbol n!) 

2 = o,.10"‘’ + + a,.10“”+ .•• + a„.10“”” 

+ + ... 


= 0 .aia, 000 aj 00000000000000000 a 40000000 . , 

where the are arbitrary digits from 1 to 9 (we could, for example, 
choose all the o< equal to 1). Such a number is characterized by 
rapidly increasing stretches of O^s, interrupted by single non-zero digits. 
Let us denote by Zm the finite decimal fraction formed by taking only 
the terms of z up to and including Then 

(4) |2 - I < 10.10“^”’+*”. 

Suppose that z were algebraic of degree n. Then in (3) let us set 
v/q = Zm = p/10"*’, obtaining 


lQ(n+l)m! 


for sufficiently large m. Combining this with (4), we should have 

1 ^ 10 _ 1 
^Q(n+l)m! .^Q(m+1)! ^Q(m+1)!-1 > 

SO that (n + l)m! > (m + 1) !*— 1 for all sufficiently large m. But this 
is false for any value of m greater than n (the reader should give a de- 



106 


NUMBER SYSTEM OF MATHEMATICS 


[III 


tailed proof of this statement), which gives a contradiction. Hence z 
is transcendental. 

It remains to prove Liouville's theorem. Suppose z is an algebraic 
number of degree n > 1 which satisfies (1), so that 

(6) f{z) = 0. 

Let Zm == Pm/^m be a sequence of rational numbers with Zm —^ z. Then 
f{Zm) = f{z„) - /(^) = - 2 ) + a^{zl - ^*) + ... + an(4 ~ z^). 

Dividing both sides of this equation by Zm — z, and using the algebraic 
formula 


u — V 








+ 


U — V 

we obtain 

= Oi + a2(Zfn + z) + asCZm + ZfnZ + Z^) + • • • 

(6) 2m - Z 

+ On(Zm”^ + . . . + z” ^). 

Since Zm tends to z as a limit, it will differ from z by less than 1 for suffi¬ 
ciently large m. We can therefore write the following rough estimate 
for sufficiently large m: 

fizm) 


(7) 


Zm - Z 


< 1 ai I + 2 I 02 1 (I z 1 + 1) + 3 1 03 1 (1 z 1 + 1)* + • • • 

+ n I o. 1(1 z I + 1)”'^ = M, 


which is a fixed number, since z is fixed in our reasoning. If now we 
choose m so large that in Zm = — the denominator qm is larger than M, 

Qm 

then 


( 8 ) 


\ Z Zm\ ^ 


I /(^m) 1 ^ I /(2m) I 

i>f gm 


For brevity let us denote pm by p and g™ by g. Then 


(9) 


l/(*J 1 = 


oog" + oig" * p + • • • + anp " 
9" 


Now the rational number z„ = p/g cannot be a root of f{x) = 0, for if 
It were we could factor out {x — Zm) from f(x), and z would satisfy an 
equation of degree less than n. Hence f(zm) 0. But the numerator 



LIOUVILLE'S THEOREM 


107 


of the right hand side of (9) is an integer, so it must be at least equal to 
1. Hence from (8) and (9) we have 


( 10 ) 







gn+1 > 


which proves the theorem. 

During the last few decades, investigations into the possibility of 
approximating algebraic numbers by rational numbers have been car¬ 
ried much farther. For example, the Norwegian mathematician A. 
Thue (1863-1922) proved that in Liouville’s inequality (3) the ex¬ 
ponent n + 1 may be replaced by (w/2) + 1. C. L. Siegel later showed 
that the even sharper statement (sharper for large n) with the exponent 
2\/^ holds. 

The subject of transcendental numbers has always fascinated mathe¬ 
maticians. But until recently, very few examples of numbers interest¬ 
ing in themselves were known which could be shown to be transcenden¬ 
tal. (In Chapter III we shall discuss the transcendental character of 
TT, from which follows the impossibility of squaring the circle with ruler 
and compass.) In a famous address to the international congress of 
mathematicians at Paris in 1900, David Hilbert proposed thirty mathe¬ 
matical problems which were easy to formulate, some of them in ele¬ 
mentary and popular language, but none of which had been solved nor 
seemed immediately accessible to the mathematical technique then 
existing. These “Hilbert problems^' stood as a challenge to the sub¬ 
sequent period of mathematical development. Almost all have been 
solved in the meantime, and often the solution meant definite progress 
in mathematical insight and general methods One of the problems 
that seemed most hopeless was to prove that 


2VT 


is a transcendental, or even that it is an irrational number. For almost 
three decades there was not the slightest suggestion of a promising line 
of attack on this problem. Finally Siegel and, independently, the young 
Russian, A. Gelfond, discovered new methods for proving the transcen¬ 
dental character of many numbers significant in mathematics, including 
the Hilbert number 2V^ and, more generally, any number where 
a is an algebraic number 0 or 1 and b is any irrational algebraic 
number. 



SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER II 

THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 


1. General Theory 

The concept of a class or set of objects is one of the most fundamental 
in mathematics. A set is defined by any property or attribute 81 which 
each object considered must either possess or not possess; tho3e objects 
which possess the property form a corresponding set A. Thus, if we 
consider the integers, and the property 81 is that of being a prime, the 
corresponding set A is the set of all primes 2, 3, 5, 7, * • • . 

The mathematical study of sets is based on the fact that sets may be 
combined by certain operations to form other sets, just as numbers 
may be combined by addition and multiplication to form other numbers. 
The study of operations on sets comprises the ^^algebra of sets,^^ which 
has many formal similarities with, as well as differences from, the algebra 
of numbers. The fact that algebraic methods can be applied to the 
study of non-numerical objects like sets illustrates the great generality 
of the concepts of modern mathematics. In recent years it has become 
apparent that the algebra of sets illuminates many branches of mathe¬ 
matics such as measure theory and the theory of probability; it is also 
helpful in the systematic reduction of mathematical concepts to their 
logical basis. 

In what follows, / will denote a fixed set of objects of any nature, 
called the universal set or universe of discourse, and A, R, 
will denote arbitrary subsets of 7. If I denotes the set of all integers, A 
may denote the set of all even integers, B the set of all odd integers, C 
the set of all primes, etc. Or I might denote the set of all points of a 
fixed plane, A the set of all points within some circle in the plane, B the 
set of all points within some other circle in the plane, etc. For con¬ 
venience we include as ‘‘subsets^^ of I the set 7 itself and the ‘‘empty 
set'^ 0 which contains no elements. The aim of this artificial extension 
is to preserve the rule that to each property SI corresponds the subset 
A of all elements of 7 possessing this property. In case 81 is some uni¬ 
versally valid property such as the one specified by the trivial equation 
X « X, the corresponding subset of 7 will be 7 itself, since every object 

108 



GENERAL THEORY 


109 


satisfies this equation, while if 8 is some self-contradictory property 
like X 7^ X, the corresponding subset will contain no objects, and may 
be denoted by the symbol 0. 

The set A is said to be a subset of the set B if there is no object in A 
that is not also in B, When this is the case we write 

A ClB or B 3 A. 

For example, the set A of all integers that are multiples of 10 is a sub¬ 
set of the set B of all integers that are multiples of 5, since every 
multiple of 10 is also a multiple of 5. The statement A CZ B does not 
exclude the possibility that B CZ ^4. If both relations hold, we say that 
the sets A and B are equal, and write 

A = B. 

For this to be true every element of A must be an element of B, and 
conversely, so that the sets A and B contain exactly the same elements. 

The relation A CL B has many similarities with the order relation 
a < b between real numbers. In particular, it is true that 

1) A CA. 

2) U A CZ B and B C A, then A = B, 

3) If .4 C B and B C C, then A CC. 

For this reason we also call the relation i4 C B an “order relation.’* 

Its chief difference from the relation a < 6 for numbers is that, while 

for every pair of numbers a and b at least one of the relations a < 6 or 
b < a always holds, this is not true for sets. For example, if A denotes 
the set consisting of the integers 1, 2, 3, 

A = {1,2,3), 

and B the set consisting of the integers 2, 3, 4, 

B = {2,3,4}, 

then neither A CZ B nor B CZ A, For this reason, the relation A CZ B 
is said to determine a partial ordering among sets, whereas the rela¬ 
tion a < b determines a complete ordering among numbers. 

In passing, we may remark that from the definition of the relation 
i4 C B it follows that 

4) 0 CZ A for any set A, and, 

5) A CZ I, 



no 


THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 


Ill] 


where A is any subset of the universe of discourse I. The relation 
4) may seem somewhat paradoxical, but it is in agreement with a strict 
interpretation of the definition of the sign C. For the statement OCA 
could be false only if the empty set 0 contained an object not in A, 
and since the empty set contains no objects at all, this is impassible no 
matter what the set A. 

We shall now define two operations on sets which have many of the 
algebraic properties of ordinary addition and multiplication of numbers, 
though they are conceptually quite distinct from those operations. To 
this end, let A and B be any two sets. By the “union” or “logical 
sum” of A and B we mean the set which consists of all the objects 
which are in either A or B (including any that may be in both). This 
set we denote by the symbol A + B. By the “intersection” or “logical 
product” of A and B we mean the set consisting only of those elements 
which are in both A and B. This set we denote by the symbol A-B or 
simply AB. To illustrate these operations, we may again choose as 
A and B the sets 

A = {1,2,31, 5= {2,3,4}. 

Then A + B = {1, 2, 3, 4}, AB={2,3j. 

Among the important algebraic properties of the operations A + B 
and AB we list the following. They should be verified by the reader 
on the basis of the definition of these operations: 

6) A + B = B + A 7) AB = BA 

8) A + (B + C) = (A + B) + C 9) A(BC) = (AB)C 

10) A + A = A 11) AA = A 

12) A(B + (7) = (AB + AC) 13) A + (BC) = (A + B)(A + C) 
14) A + 0 = A 15) A/ = A 

16) A + / = 7 17) AO = 0 

18) the relation A C B is equivalent to either of the two relations 
A + B = B, AB = A. 

The verification of these laws is a matter of elementary logic. For 
example, 10) states that the set consisting of those objects which are 
either in A or in A is precisely the set A, while 12) states that the set 
consisting of those objects which are in A and also in either B or C is 
the same as the set consisting of those objects which are either in both 



genp:ral theory 


111 


A and B or in both A and C. The logical reasoning involved in this 
and other arguments may be illustrated by representing the sets A, B,C 
as areas in a plane, provided that one is careful to provide for all the 
possibilities of the sets involved having elements distinct from and in 
common with each other. 



Fig. 26. Union and intersection of sets. 


The reader will have observed that the laws 6, 7, 8, 9, and 12 are 
identical with the familiar commutative, associative, and distributive 
laws of algebra. It follows that all rules of the ordinary algebra of 
numbers which are consequences of the commutative, associative, and 
distributive laws are also valid in the algebra of sets. The laws 10,11, 
and 13, however, have no numerical analogs, and give the algebra of 
sets a simpler structure than the algebra of numbers. For example, 
the binomial theorem of ordinary algebra is replaced in the algebra of 
sets by the equality 

(A + By = (A + B).{A + B) . (A + B) = A + B 

which is a consequence of 11. Laws 14, 15, and 17 indicate that the 
properties of 0 and I with respect to union and intersection of sets are 
largely similar to the properties of the numbers 0 and 1 with respect to 
ordinary addition and multiplication. Law 16 has no analog in the 
algebra of numbers. 

It remains to define one further operation in the algebra of sets. Let 
A be any subset of the universal set 7. Then by the complement of A 
in 7 we mean the set which consists of all the objects in 7 which are not 
in A, This set we denote by the symbol A\ Thus if 7 is the set of all 
natural numbers and A the set of primes, A' consists of 1 and the compos¬ 
ites. The operation A', which has no exact analog in the algebra of 
numbers, possesses the following properties: 




112 


THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 


ini 


19) A + A' ^ I 20) AA' = 0 

21) O' = / 22) 7' = 0 

23) A" - A 

24) The relation A C B is equivalent to the relation J5' C A'. 

25) (A + BY = A'B' 26) (AS)' = A' + S'. 

Again we shall leave the verification of these laws to the reader. 

The laws 1 to 26 form the basis of the ajgebra of sets. They possess 
the remarkable property of ^‘duality/' in the following sense: 

If in any one of the laws 1 to 26 the symbols 


a 

and 

3 

0 

and 

I 

+ 

and 

. 


are everywhere interchanged (insofar as they appear) ^ then the result is 
again one of these laws. 

For example, the law 6 becomes 7, 12 becomes 13, 17 becomes 16, etc. 
It follows that to any theorem which can he proved on the basis of the laws 
1 to 26 there corresponds anotherj ^^dualy* theoremy obtained by making 
the interchanges above. For, since the proof of any theorem will consist 
of the successive application at each step of certain of the laws 1 to 26, 
the application at each step of the dual law will provide a proof of 
the dual theorem. (For a similar duality in geometry, see Chapt. IV.) 

2. Application to Mathematical I^ogic 

The verification of the laws of the algebra of sets rested on the analysis 
of the logical meaning of the relation ACS and the operations A + S, 
AS, and A'. We can now reverse this process and use the laws 1 to 26 
as the basis for an ‘^algebra of logic." More precisely, that part of 
logic which concerns sets, or what is equivalent, properties or attributes 
of objects, may be reduced to a formal algebraic system based on the 
laws 1 to 26. The logical ''universe of discourse" defines the set 7; 
each property or attribute 21 of objects defines the set A consisting of all 
objects in I which possess this attribute. The rules for translating the 
usual logical terminology into the language of sets may be illustrated 
by the following examples: 

"Either A or S" 


*TBoth A and S" 


A + B 
AB 



APPLICATION TO MATHEMATICAL LOGIC 


113 


^^Neither A nor jB*’ 

“Not both A and 

“All A are or “If A then or “A 
implies B^* 

“Some A are B” 

“No A are B” 

“Some A are not B** 

“There are no A^^ 


A' 

(A + B)', or equivalently, A'B' 
(AB)', or equivalently, A' + B' 
A CB 

AB ^ 0 
AB = 0 
AB' 5^ 0 
A ^ 0 


In terms of the algebra of sets, the syllogism “Barbara,'' which states: 
“If all A are B, and all B are C, then all A are C," becomes simply 

3) If A C B and B C C then ACC. 

Likewise, the “law of contradiction," which states: “An object cannot 
both possess an attribute and not possess it," becomes 

20) AA' = 0, 

while the “law of excluded middle" which states: “An object must either 
possess a given attribute or not possess it" becomes 

19) A + A' = /. 

Thus the part of logic which is expressible in terms of the symbols C, 
+ , •, and ' can be treated as a formal algebraic system, subject to the 
laws 1 to 26. This fusion of the logical analysis of mathematics with 
the mathematical analysis of logic has resulted in the creation of a new 
discipline, mathematical logic, which is now in the process of vigorous 
development. 

From the point of view of axiomatics, it is a remarkable fact that the 
statements 1 to 26, together with all other theorems of the algebra of 
sets, can be deduced from the following three equations: 

A + B = B + A 

27) (A + B) + C = A + (B + C) 

(A' + By + (A' + B)' = A. 

It follows that the algebra of sets can be constructed as a purely deduc¬ 
tive theory like Euclidean geometry on the basis of these three state- 



114 


THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 


[III 


ments taken as axioms. When this is done, the operation AB and the 
order relation A Cl B are defined in terms of i4 + B and X': 

AB means the set (4' + B')' 

A Cl B means that A + B — B, 

A quite different example of a mathematical system satisfying all the 
formal laws of the algebra of sets is provided by the eight numbers 
1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 10, 10 , 30, where a + 6 is defined to mean the least common 
multiple of a and 6, ah the greatest common divisor of a and 6, a C 6 
the statement is a factor of 6,^' and a' the number 30/a. The 
existence of such examples has led to the study of general algebraic 
systems satisfying the laws 27). These systems are called ‘^Boolean 
algebras’’ in honor of George Boole (181&-1864), an English mathema¬ 
tician and logician whose book. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought^ 
appeared in 1854. 


3. An Application to the Theory of Probability 

The algebra of sets greatly illuminates the theory of probability. To con¬ 
sider only the simplest case, let us imagine an experiment with a finite number 
of possible outcomes, all of which are assumed to be ‘‘equally likely.'' The experi¬ 
ment may, for example, consist of drawing a card at random from a well-shuffled 
deck of 52 cards. If the set of possible outcomes of the experiment is denoted by 
/, and if A denotes any subset of 7, then the probability that the outcome of the 
experiment will belong to the subset A is defined to be the ratio 

p{A) ”^^her of elements in A 
number of elements in 7 * 


If we denote the number of elements in any set A by the symbol n(A), then this 
definition may be written in the form 


( 1 ) 


p(A) 


n(A) 

n(7)- 


In our example, if A denotes the subset of hearts, then n(A) *= 13, n(7) = 52, 
and p{A) - I - 

The concepts of the algebra of sets enter into the calculation of probabilities 
when the probabilities of certain sets are known and the probability of others are 
required. For example, from a knowledge of p(A), p(B), and p(AB) we may 
compute the probability of p(A -f- B)i 

(2) p(A -h B) - p(A) + p(B) - p(AB). 

The proof is simple. We have 

n(A + B) = n(A) 4* n(B) - n(AB), 



APPLICATION TO THEORY OF PROBABILITY 


115 


•ince the elements common to A and B, i.e. the elements in AB^ will be counted 
twice in the sum n(A) -f- w(B), and hence we must subtract n(AB) from this sum 
in order to obtain the correct count for n(A -f B). Dividing each term of this 
equation by n(/), we obtain equation (2). 

A more interesting formula arises when we consider three subsets, A, B, C, 
of /. From (2) we have 

p(A + B + C) ^ p[(A + B) 4- Cl = p(A + B) + p(C) - p[(A + B)C]. 
From (12) of the preceding section we know that (A -f B)C =* AC + BC\ Henco 
p[(A 4- B)C1 = p(AC 4- BC) = p{AC) 4- p(BC) - p(ABC). 

Substituting in the previous equation this value for p[{A 4- B)C] and the value 
of p(A 4" B) given by (2), we obtain the desired formula: 

p(A 4- B 4- C) = p(A) 4- P(B) 

4- p(C) - p(AB) ~ p(AC) - p(BC) + p(ABC). 

As an example, let us consider the following experiment. The three digits 
1, 2, 3 are written down in random order. What is the probability that at least 
one digit will occupy its proper place? Let A denote the set of all arrangements 
in which the digit 1 comes first, B the set of all arrangements in which the digit 
2 comes second, and C the set of all arrangements in which the digit 3 comes third. 
Then we wish to calculate p(A 4- B 4- C). It is clear that 

p(A) » p(B) « p(C) = i = }; 

for when one digit occupies its proper place there are two possible orders for the 
remaining digits, out of a total of 3-2‘l = 6 possible arrangements of the three 
digits. Moreover, 

p(AB) = p(AC) = p(BC) = J 

and 

p(ABC) * i, 

since there is only one way in which each of these cases may occur. It follows 
from (3) that 

p(A 4- B 4- C) = 3.i - 3(i) + i 

= 1 - i + i = i = 0.6666 ••• 

Exercise: Find a corresponding formula for p(A 4- B 4- + B) and apply it 

to the case of four digits. The corresponding probability is f = 0.6250. 

The general formula for the union of n subsets is 

p(Ai + A 2 + • • • + An) S p(A*) — S p(A,-A,) 4- S p(A< A/A*) 

(4) » » . 

— ••• dbp(AiAj ••• An), 

where the symbols S, 2J, 2J, •••,2 stand for summation of the possible com- 

1 S I n—1 

binations of the sets Ai , AjAn taken one, two, throe, ••• , (n ~ 1) at a 
time. This formula may be established by mathematical induction in precisely 
the same way that we derived (3) from (2). From (4) it is easy to show that if 



116 


THE ALGEBRA OF SETS 


[ID 


the n digits 1, 2, 3, • • • , n are written down in random order, the probability that 
at least one digit will occupy its proper place is 


(5) 


P« 


^ 2l'^3! 



where the last term is taken with a plus or minus sign according as n is odd or 
even. In particular, for n = 5 the probability is 


Pi 




io- i « — 

4l'^5! “ 30 


0.63333 • • • . 


We shall see in Chapter VIII that as n tends to infinity the expression 

111 1 
'®““21 3!'^4! ‘’ ^nl 

tends to a limit, 1/e, whose value to five places of decimals is .36788. Since from 
(6) Pn = 1 — ) this shows that as n tends to infinity 

p, 1 - 1/e = .63212. 



CHAPTER III 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS. THE ALGEBRA OF 
NUMBER FIELDS 

INTRODUCTION 

Construction problems have always been a favorite subject in geom¬ 
etry. With ruler and compass alone a great variety of constructions 
may be performed, as the reader will remember from school; a line seg¬ 
ment or an angle may be bisected, a line may be drawn from a point 
perpendicular to a given line, a regular hexagon may be inscribed in a 
circle, etc. In all these problems the ruler is used merely as a straight¬ 
edge, an instrument for drawing a straight line but not for measuring 
or marking off distances. The traditional restriction t6 ruler and com¬ 
pass alone goes back to antiquity, although the Greeks themselves did 
not hesitate to use other instruments. 

One of the most famous of the classical construction problems is 
the so-called contact problem of Apollonius (circa 200 B.C.) in which 
three arbitrary circles in the plane are given and a fourth circle tangent 
to all three is required. In particular, it is permitted that one or more 
of the given circles have degenerated into a point or a straight line 
(a ^^circle” with radius zero or ‘infinity,’’ respectively). For example, 
it may be required to construct a circle tangent to two given straight 
lines and passing through a given point. While such special cases are 
rather easily dealt with, the general problem is considerably more 
difficult. 

Of all construction problems, that of constructing with ruler and 
compass a regular polygon of n sides has perhaps the greatest interest. 
For certain values of n—e.g. n = 3,4, 5, 6— the solution has been known 
since antiquity, and forms an important part of school geometry. But 
for the regular heptagon (n = 7) the construction has been proved 
impossible. There are three other classical Greek problems for which 
a solution has been sought in vain: to trisect an arbitrary given angle, 
to double a given cube (i.e. to find the edge of a cube whose volume shall 
be twice that of a cube with a given segment as its edge) and to square 
the circle (i.e. to construct a square having the same area as a given 

117 



118 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[IIIl 


circle). In all these problems, ruler and compass are the only instru¬ 
ments permitted. 

Unsolved problems of this sort gave rise to one of the most remarkable 
and novel developments in mathematics, when, after centuries of futile 
search for solutions, the suspicion grew that these problems might be 
definitely unsolvable. Thus mathematicians were challenged to investi¬ 
gate the question: How is it possible to prove that certain problems cannot 
be solved? 

In algebra, it was the problem of solving equations of degree 5 and 
higher which led to this new way of thinking. During the sixteenth 
century mathematicians had learned that algebraic equations of degree 
3 or 4 could be solved by a process similar to the elementary method 
for solving quadratic equations. All these methods have the following 
characteristic in common: the solutions or “roots^^ of the equation can 
be written as algebraic expressions obtained from the coefficients of the 
equation by a sequence of operations, each of which is either a rational 
operation—addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division—or the ex¬ 
traction of a square root, cube root, or fourth root. One says that 
algebraic equations up to the fourth degree can be solved *‘by radicals” 
(radix is the Latin word for root). Nothing seemed more natural 
than to extend this procedure to equations of degree 5 and higher, by 
using roots of higher order. All such attempts failed. Even distin¬ 
guished mathematicians of the eighteenth century deceived themselves 
into thinking that they had found the solution. It was not until early 
in the nineteenth century that the Italian Ruffini (1765-1822) and the 
Norwegian genius N. H. Abel (1802-1829) conceived the then revolu¬ 
tionary idea of proving the impossibility of the solution of the general 
algebraic equation of degree n by means of radicals. One must clearly 
understand that the question is not whether any algebraic equation of 
degree n possesses solutions. This fact was first proved by Gauss in 
his doctoral thesis in 1799. So there is no doubt about the existence 
of the roots of an equation, especially since these roots can be found by 
suitable procedures to any degree of accuracy. The art of the nu¬ 
merical solution of equations is, of course, very important and highly 
developed. But the problem of Abel and RuflSni was quite different: 
can the solution be effected by means of rational operations and radicals 
alone? It was the desire to attain full clarity about this question that 
inspired the magnificent development of modern algebra and group 
theory started by Ruffini, Abel, and Galois (1811-1832). 

The question of proving the impossibility of certain geometrical con- 



INTRODUCTION 


119 


structions provides one of the simplest examples of this trend in algebra. 
By the use of algebraic concepts we shall be able in this chapter to 
prove the impossibility of trisecting the angle, constructing the regular 
heptagon, or doubling the cube, by ruler and compass alone. (The 
problem of squaring the circle is much more difficult to dispose of; see 
p. 140.) Our point of departure will be not so much the negative question 
of the impossibility of certain constructions, but rather the positive 
question: How can all constructible problems be completely charac¬ 
terized? After we have answered this question, it will be an easy 
matter to show that the problems mentioned above do not fall into this 
category. 

At the age of seventeen Gauss investigated the constructibility of 
regular “p-gons” (polygons with p sides), where p is a prime number. 
The construction was then known only for p = 3 and p = 5. Gauss 
discovered that the regular p-gon is constructible if and only if p is a 
prime “Fermat number,” 

p = 2*" -f 1. 

The first Fermat numbers are 3, 5, 17, 257, 65537 (see p. 26). So 
overwhelmed was young Gauss by his discovery that he at once gave 
up his intention of becoming a philologist and resolved to devote his 
life to mathematics and its applications. He always looked back on 
this first of his great feats with particular pride. After his death, a 
bronze statue of him was erected in Goettingen, and no more fitting 
honor could be devised than to shape the pedestal in the form of a 
regular 17-gon. 

When dealing with a geometrical construction, one must never forget 
that the problem is not that of drawing figures in practice with a certain 
degree of accuracy, but of whether, by the use of straightedge and 
compass alone, the solution can be found theoretically, supposing our 
instruments to have perfect precision. What Gauss proved is that his 
constructions could be performed in principle. His theory does not 
concern the simplest way actually to perform them or the devices which 
could be used to simplify and to cut down the number of necessary steps. 
This is a question of much less theoretical importance. From a prac¬ 
tical point of view, no such construction would give as satisfactory a 
result as could be obtained by the use of a good protractor. Failure 
properly to understand the theoretical character of the question of geo¬ 
metrical construction and stubbornness in refusing to take cognizance 
of well-established scientific facts are responsible for the persistence of 



120 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[III] 


an unending line of angle-trisectors and circle-squarers. Those among 
them who are able to understand elementary mathematics might profit 
by studying this chapter. 

Once more it should be emphasized that in some ways our concept 
of geometrical consti*uction seems artificial. Ruler and compass are 
certainly the simplest instruments for drawing, but the restriction to 
these instruments is by no means inherent in geometry. As the Greek 
mathematicians recognized long ago, certain problems—for example 
that of doubling the cube—can be solved if, e.g., the use of a ruler in the 
form of a right angle is permitted; it is just as easy to invent instruments 
other than the compass by means of which one can draw ellipses, hyper¬ 
bolas, and more complicated curves, and whose use enlarges considerably 
the domain of constructible figures. In the next sections, however, we 
shall adhere to the standard concept of geometrical constructions using 
only ruler and compass. 


PART I 

IMPOSSIBILITY PROOFS AND ALGEBRA 
§1. FUNDAMENTAL GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 

L Construction of Fields and Square Root Extraction 

To shape our general ideas we shall begin by examining a few of the 
classical constructions. The key to a more profound understanding 
lies in translating the geometrical problems into the language of algebra. 
Any geometrical construction problem is of the following type: a certain 
set of line segments, say a, 6, c, • • • , is given, and one or more other 
segments a;, y, • • • , are sought. It is always possible to formulate prob¬ 
lems in this way, even when at first glance they have a quite different 
aspect. The required segments may appear as sides of a triangle to be 
constructed, as radii of circles, or as the rectangular coordinates of 
certain points (see e.g. p. 137). For simplicity we shall suppose that 
only one segment x is required. The geometrical construction then 
amounts to solving an algebraic problem: first we must find a relation¬ 
ship (equation) between the required quantity x and the given quanti¬ 
ties a, 6, c, • • • ; next we must find the unknown quantity x by solving 
this equation, and finally we must determine whether this solution can 
be obtained by algebraic processes that correspond to ruler and compass 
constructions. It is the principle of analytic geometry, the quantita- 



CONSTRUCTION OF FIELDS 


121 


tive characterization of geometrical objects by real numbers, based on 
the introduction of the real number continuum, that provides the 
foundation for the whole theory. 

First we observe that some of the simplest algebraic operations corre¬ 
spond to elementary geometrical constructions. If two segments are 
given with lengths a and b (as measured by a given ‘‘unit’* segment), 
then it is very easy to construct a + by a — by ra (where r is any rational 
number), a/6, and ab. 

To construct a + 6 (Fig. 27) we draw a straight line and on it mark 
off with the compass the distances OA = a and AB b. Then OB = 
a + 6. Similarly, for a — 6 we mark off OA = a and AB = by but 
this time with AB in the opposite direction from OA. Then OB = 
a — b. To construct 3a we simply add a + a + a; similarly we can 



Fig. 27. Coiiatruction of o + 6 and a — 6. Fig. 28. Construction of o/3. 



Fig. 29. Construction of a/6. 


Fig. 30. Construction of ab. 


construct pa, where p is any integer. We construct a/3 by the following 
device (Fig. 28): we mark off OA = a on one line, and draw any second 
line through 0. On this line we mark off an arbitrary segment OC = c, 
and construct OD = 3c. We connect A and Z), and draw a line through 
C parallel to AD, intersecting OA at B. The triangles OBC and OAD 
are similar; hence OB/a — OBjOA = OCfOD = 1/3, and OB = a/3. 
In the same way we can construct a/g, where q is any integer. By 
performing this operation on the segment pa, we can thus construct ra, 
where r = p/q is any rational number. 

To construct a/6 (Fig. 29) we mark off OB = 6 and OA = a on the 
sides of any angle 0, and on OB we mark off OD = 1. Through D we 
draw a line parallel to AB meeting OA in C. Then OC will have the 




122 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


(IIIl 


length a/6. The construction of a6 is shown in Figure 30, where A D is a 
line parallel to BC through A . 

From these considerations it follows that the ^WaiionaV^ algebraic proc- 
esseSf —addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division of known 
quantities— can be performed by geometrical constricctions. From any 
given segments, measured by real numbers a, 6, c, • • • , we can, by suc¬ 
cessive application of these simple constructions, construct any quantity- 
that is expressible in terms of a, 6, c, • • • in a rational way, i.e. by re¬ 
peated application of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. 
The totality of quantities that can be obtained in this way from 
a, 6, c, • • • constitute what is called a number field, a set of numbers 
such that any rational operations applied to two or more members of 
the set again yield a number of the set. We recall that the rational 
numbers, the real numbers, and the complex numbers form such fields. 
In the present case, the field is said to be generated by the given numbers 
a, b, c, ••• , 

The decisive new construction which carries us beyond the field just 
obtained is the extraction of a square root: if a segment a is given, 
then \/^ can also be constructed by using 
only ruler and compass. On a straight line we 
mark off OA = a and AB = 1 (Fig. 31). We 
draw a circle with the segment OB as its dia¬ 
meter and construct the perpendicular to OB 
through A, which meets the circle in C. The 
triangle OBC has a right angle at C, by the 
theorem of elementary geometry which states that an angle inscribed 
in a semicircle is a right angle. Hence, A OCA = A ABC, the right 
triangles OAC and CAB are similar, and we have for x = AC, 

a X 2 r 

- = X ^ a, x = Va• 

X X 

2. Regular Polygons 

Let us now consider a few somewhat more elaborate construction 
problems. We begin with the regular decagon. Suppose that a regular 
decagon is inscribed in a circle with radius 1 (Fig. 32), and call its 
side X. Since x will subtend an angle of 36® at the center of the circle, 
the other two angles of the large triangle will each be 72®, and hence 
the dotted line which bisects angle A divides triangle OAB into two 
isosceles triangles, each with equal sides of length x. The radius of the 
circle is thus divided into two segments, x and 1 — x. Since OA B is 



Fig. 31. ConatructioQ of Vo. 



REGULAR POLYGONS 


123 


similar to the smaller isosceles triangle, we have 1/x = x/(l — x). 
From this proportion we get the quadratic equation x® + x — 1 = 0, 
the solution of wliich is x = (\/5 — l)/2. (The other solution of the 
equation is irrelevant, since it yields a negative x.) From this it is 
clear that x can be constructed geometrically. Having the length x, we 
may now construct the regular decagon by marking off this length ten 
times as a chord of the circle. The regular pentagon may now be 
constructed by joining alternate vertices of the regular decagon. 

Instead of constructing y/b by the method of Figure 31 we can also obtain 
it as the hypotenuse of a right triangle whose other sides have lengths 1 and 2. 
We then obtain x by subtracting the unit length from \/6” and bisecting the result. 

The ratio OB\AB of the preceding problem has been called the 
golden ratio, because the Greek mathematicians considered a rectangle 




Fig. 33. Regular hexagon. 


whose two sides are in this ratio to be aesthetically the most pleasing. 
Its value, incidentally, is about 1.62. 

Of all the regular polygons the hexagon is simplest to construct. We 
start with a circle of radius r; the length of the side of a regular hexagon 
inscribed in this circle will then be equal to r. The hexagon itself can 
be constructed by successively marking off from any point of the circle 
chords of length r until all six vertices are obtained. 

From the regular n-gon we can obtain the regular 2n-gon by bisecting 
the arc subtended on the circumscribed circle by each edge of the n-gon, 
using the additional points thus found as well as the original vertices for 
the required 2n-gon. Starting with the diameter of a circle (a ‘^2-gon^O, 
we can therefore construct the 4, 8, 16, • • • , 2”-gon. Similarly, we can 
obtain the 12-, 24-, 48-gon, etc. from the hexagon, and the 20-, 40-gon, 
etc, from the decagon. 



124 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


I HI] 


If Bn denotes the length of the side of the regular n-gon inscribed in the unit 
circle (circle with radius 1), then the side of the 2n*gon is of length 

~ *%/2 — \/4 — «* 

This may be proved as follows: In Figure 34 is equal to DE — 2DC, S 2 n equal 
to DBf and AB equal to 2. The area of the right triangle ABD is given by 
\BD'AD and by \AB*CD. Since AD * \/AB^ ~ DB^y we find, by substituting 
AB * 2, BD «■ San , CD = §Sn , and by equating the two expressions for the area, 

Bn - Btny /4 - sjn Or (4 “ s!n). 

Solving this quadratic equation for x » and observing that x must be less 
than 2, one easily finds the formula given above. 



Fig. S4. 


From this formula and the fact that S 4 (the side of the square) is equal to y/ 2 
it follows that 

••- V2 - V2 , » i . - \/2 - \/2 + \72 , 

“ 4/2 - ^2 + V2 + V2, etc. 

As a general formula we obtain, for n > 2, 

- j/2 - 

with n — 1 nested square roots. The circumference of the 2^-gon in the circle 
is 2"sa» . As n tends to infinity, the 2'*-gon tends to the circle. Hence 2**52'» 
approaches the length of the circumference of the unit circle, which is by defini¬ 
tion 2ir. Thus we obtain, by substituting m for n — 1 and cancelling a factor 2, 
the limiting formula for w: 

2 V 2 - -s/a + \/2 + ... + \/2 -► » as m-»«o, 

'-V-- 


m square roots 


REGULAR POLYGONS 


125 


Exercise: Since 2” —► w, prove as a consequence that 

V 2 + V2 + • • • + _» 2 as n-* CO. 

n square roots. 

The results obtained thus far exhibit the following characteristic 
feature: The sides of the 2'^-gony the 5*2"*-^on, and the 3-2’‘-^on, can all 
he found entirely by the processes of addition^ subtraction, multiplication, 
division, and the extraction of square roots. 

*3. Apollonius’ Problem 

Another construction problem that becomes quite simple from the 
algebraic standpoint is the famous contact problem of Apollonius already 
mentioned. In the present context it is unnecessary for us to find a 
particularly elegant construction. What matters here is that in prin¬ 
ciple the problem can be solved by straightedge and compass alone. 
We shall give a brief indication of the proof, leaving the question of a 
more elegant method of construction to page 161. 

Let the centers of the three given circles have coordinates (xi , yi), 
(x 2 , y 2 ) and (xa, yi), respectively^ with radii ri, rj, and ra. Denote the 
center and radius of the required circle by (x, y) and r. Then the condi¬ 
tion that the required circle be tangent to the three given circles is 
obtained by observing that the distance between the centers of two 
tangent circles is equal to the sum or difference of the radii, according 
as the circles are tangent externally or internally. This yields the 
equations 

(1) (x - Xi)^ + (y - y\f ~ (r Ih ri)* = 0, 

(2) (x — Xa)^ + ( 2 / — 2 / 2 )^ — (r db rj)* *= 0, 

(3) (x - Xa)* + ( 2 / - yif - (r ± rzY = 0, 

or 

(la) x^ + 2 /* — r* — 2xxi — 2yyi i 2rri + xj + 2/1 — rJ = 0, 
etc. The plus or minus sign is to be chosen in each of these equations 
according as the circles are to be externally or internally tangent. (See 
Fig. 35.) Equations (1), (2), (3) are three quadratic equations in three 
unknowns x, y, r with the property that the second degree terms are 
the same in each equation, as is seen from the expanded form (la). 
Hence, by subtracting (2) from (1), we get a linear equation in x, y, r: 

(4) ax + by + cr = d, 

where a = 2(x2 — Xi), etc. Similarly, by subtracting (3) from (1), we 
get another linear equation, 

(5) a'x + b'y + cW «= d\ 



126 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


tllll 


Solving (4) and (5) for x and y in terms of r and then substituting in (1) 
we get a quadratic equation in r, which can be solved by rational opera¬ 
tions and the extraction of a square root (see p. 91). There will in 
general be two solutions of this equation, of which only one will be 
positive. After finding r from this equation we obtain x and y from the 
two linear equations (4) and (5). The circle with center {Xy y) and 
radius r will be tangent to the three given circles. In the whole process 
we have used only rational operations and square root extractions. It 
follows that r, x, and y can be constructed by ruler and compass alone. 



Fig. 35. Apollonius circles. 


There will in general be eight solutions of the problem of Apollonius, 
corresponding to the 2*2*2 = 8 possible combinations of + and — signs 
in equations (1), (2), and (3). These choices correspond to the condi¬ 
tions that the desired circles be externally or internally tangent to each 
of the three given circles. It may happen that our algebraic procedure 
does not actually yield real values for x, y, and r. This will be the 
case, for example, if the three given circles are concentric, so that no 
solution to the geometrical problem exists. Likewise, we must expect 
possible ‘‘degenerations” of the solution, as in the case when the three 
given circles degenerate into three points on a line. Then the Apol¬ 
lonius circle degenerates into this line. We shall not discuss these 



APOLLONIUS' PROBLEM 


127 


possibilities in detail; a reader with some algebraic experience will be 
able to complete the analysis. 

♦§2. CONSTRUCTIBLE NUMBERS AND NUMBER FIELDS 

1. General Theory 

Our previous discussion indicates the general algebraic background 
of geometrical constructions. Every ruler and compass construction 
consists of a sequence of steps, each of which is one of the following: 
1) connecting two points by a straight line, 2) finding the point of 
intersection of two lines, 3) drawing a circle with a given radius about 
a point, 4) finding the points of intersection of a circle with another 
circle or with a line. An element (point, line, or circle) is considered to 
be known if it was given at the outset or if it has been constructed in 
some previous step. For a theoretical analysis we may refer the whole 
construction to a coordinate system x, y (see p. 73). The given ele¬ 
ments will then be represented by points or segments in the x, y plane. 
If only one segment is given at the outset, we may take this as the unit 
length, which fixes the point x = 1, 2/ = 0. Sometimes there appear 
‘^arbitraryelements: arbitrary lines are drawn, arbitrary points or radii 
are chosen. (An example of such an arbitrary element appears in 
constructing the midpoint of a segment; we draw two circles of equal 
but arbitrary radius from each endpoint of the segment, and join their 
intersections.) In such cases we may choose the element to be rational; 
i.e. arbitrary points may be chosen with rational coordinates x, t/, arbi¬ 
trary lines ax + hy c = Q with rational coefficients a, 6, c, arbitrary 
circles with centers having rational coordinates and with rational radii. 
We shall make such a choice of rational arbitrary elements throughout; 
if the elements are indeed arbitrary this restriction cannot affect the 
result of a construction. 

For the sake of simplicity, we shall assume in the following discussion 
that only one element, the unit length 1, is given at the outset. Then 
according to §1 we can construct by ruler and compass all numbers 
that can be obtained from unity by the rational processes of addition, 
subtraction, multiplication and division, i.e. all the rational numbers 
r/s, where r and « are integers. The system of rational numbers is 
‘‘closed^^ with respect to the rational operations; that is, the sum, differ¬ 
ence, product, or quotient of any two rational numbers—excluding divi¬ 
sion by 0, as always—is again a rational number. Any set of numbers 
possessing this property of closure with respect to the four rational 
operations is called a number field. 



128 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[IIIl 


Exercise: Show that every field contains all the rational numbers at least. 
(Hint: If a 4= 0 is a number in the field F, then a/a *■ 1 belongs to F, and from 1 
we can obtain any rational number by rational operations.) 


Starting from the unit, we can thus construct the whole rational 
number field and hence all the rational points (i.e. points with both 
cobrdinates rational) in the Xy y plane. We can reach new, irrational, 
numbers by using the compass to construct e.g. the number \/^ which, 
as we know from Chapter II, §2, is not in the rational field. Having 
constructed y/2 we may then, by the ‘^rationaF' constructions of §1, 
find all numbers of the form 


( 1 ) 


a + hy/2 , 


where a, 6 are rational, and therefore are themselves constructible. We 
may likewise construct all numbers of the form 


a + 6\/2 
c "b d\/2 


or 


(a + &\/2)(c + d\/2)y 


where a, 6, c, d are rational. These numbers, however, may always be 
written in the form (1). For we have 


a + h^/2 _ + h\/2 c — d\/2 
c + d-s/2 c + d\/2 c — d\/2 

ac -- 2bd . 


be — ad 
c2 - 2(P 


\/2 = p + qV2y 


where p, q are rational. (The denominator c* — 2d^ cannot be zero, 
for if — 2d^ = 0, then \/2 = c/d, contrary to the fact that is 
irrational.) Likewise 

(a + 6\/2)(c + d-\/2) = (ac + 2bd) + (be + ad)y/2 = r + 5\/2, 

where r, « are rational. Hence all that we reach by the construction 
of \/2 is the set of numbers of the form (1), with arbitrary rational a, 6. 


Exercises: From p 


1 + y/2, g 2 — \/2, r = — 3 + y/2 obtain the numbers 
PQr p + qr 


p + p’. (p-p’)- 


r’ l+r*’ 3 + pr«’ 


in the form (1). 


These numbers (1) again form a field, as the preceding discussion 
shows. (That the sum and difference of two numbers of the form (1) 
are also of the form (1) is obvious.) This field is larger than the rational 
field, which is a part or subfield of it. But, of course, it is smaller 
than the field of all real numbers. Let us call the rational field Fo and 
the new field of numbers of the form (1), Fi. The constructibility of 



GENERAL THEORY 


129 


every number in the ‘‘extension field'^ Fi has been established. We may 
now extend the scope of our constructions, e.g. by taking a number 
of 7^1, say A; = 1 + \/2, and extracting the square root, thus obtaining 
the constructible number 

Vl + V2 = 'x/ifc, 

and with it, according to §1, the field consisting of all the numbers 

(2) p + qVk, 

where now p and q may be arbitrary numbers of Fi , i.e. of the form 
a + 6\/2, with a, h in Fq , i.e. rational. 

Exerciser: Represent 

, + (i + Vi)(2-Vi)(vi + :;7j) 

• i + Vi ' (Vt)'-3 ’ i + Vit 

in the form (2). 

All these numbers have been constructed on the assumption that only one 
segment was given at the outset. If two segments are given we may select one 
of them as the unit length. In terms of this unit suppose that the length of the 
other segment is a. Then we can construct the field G consisting'of all numbers 
of the form 

am «"* + am-i * -h Qi« -f Op 

bn a" -h bn-i + • • • + 6i a + 6o 

where the numbers og, • • • , and 6o , • • • , &« are rational, and m and n are 
arbitrary positive integers. 

Exercise: If two segments of lengths 1 and a are given, give actual construc¬ 
tions for 1 + « -b (1 + «)/(! — «)» 


Now let us assume more generally that we are able to construct all 
the numbers of some number field F, We shall show that the use of the 
ruler alone will never lead us out of the field F. The equation of the 
straight line through two points whose coordinates ai, bi and a^ , 62 are 
in F is (61 — b2)x + (02 — ai)y + (aib^ — a^bi) = 0 (see p. 491 ); its 
coefficients are rational expressions formed from numbers in F, and 
therefore, by definition of a field, are themselves in F, Moreover, 
if we have two lines, ax + fiy — y = 0 and a'x + 0'y — = 0 , with 


coefficients in F, then the coordinates of their point of intersection. 


found by solving these two simultaneous equations, are x = 


7 ^' “ fiY 
a/3' - jSa'' 


y = ^. Since these are likewise numbers of F, it is clear that 
a/3' - /3a' 

the use of the ruler alone cannot take us beyond the confines of the 


field F. 



130 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


mil 


Exercises: The lines x -f \/2y — 1 — 0 , 2 aj — y 4 - y/2 - 0 , have coefficients in 
the field ( 1 ). Calculate the codrdinates of their point of intersection, and verify 
that these have the form (1).—Join the points (1, ^/2) and (\/2» 1 “ \/2) ^ 

line aa? 4 - 62 / + c — 0 , and verify that the coefficients are of the form ( 1 ).—Do 
the same with respect t o the fie ld ( 2 ) for the lines \/l 4 - 4 - y/2y =* 1 , 

(1 4- V2)x - -^2, and the points (y/2t - l), (l 4- y/2, Vl 4~\/2), 

respectively. 


We can only break through the walls of F by using the compass. 
For this purpose we select an element k of F which is such that \/k 
is not in F. Then we can construct y/lc and therefore all the numbers 

(3) CL 4“ h\/Tc, 

where a and b are rational, or even arbitrary elements of F. The sum 
and the difference of two numbers a 4- hxHc and c 4- their 

product, (a 4- hy/Tc){c 4- dy/k) = (oc 4- khd) + {ad + bc)\^kj and 
their quotient, 

a 4“ b\/k (a 4“ b\/k){c — dy/k) ac — kbd be — ad 
C + dVk " 

are again of the form p 4" qy/k with p and q in F, (The denominator 
— kd^ cannot vanish unless c and d are both zero; for otherwise we 
would have y/H = c/d, a number in F, contrary to the assumption 
that y/k is not in F.) Hence the set of numbers of the form a 4“ by/k 
forms a field F'. The field F' contains the original field F, for we may, 
in particular, choose 6 = 0. F' is called an extendon field of F, and F 
a subfield of F'. 

As an example, let F be the field a 4- by/2 with rational o, 6, and take 
k ^ y/2. Then the numbers of the extension field F' are represented 
hy v + q'^2y where p and q are in F, p = a 4- by/2, g = a' 4" b'y/2, 
with rational a, 6, a', 6'. Any number in F' can be reduced to that 
form; for example 

1 y/2- ^ y/2- ^ 

V2 + ^2 {y/2 4- ^2)(V2 - -^2) ^ 2 - x/2 

= ^ ^ ^ V^(2 +V2) _ (2 +V2) ._ 

2-\/2 2-^2 4-2 4 _ 2 ^ 

= (1 + V 2 ) - (1 + i \/ 2 ) ^2 


Exercise: Let F be the field p + }\^2 + where p and q are of the form 

1 4" \/2 4 - y/2 

a 4" hy/i, a, h rational. Represent- 7 :—- r in this form. 

2 - 3V2 4- y/2 



GENERAL THEORY 


131 


We have seen that if we start with any field F of constructible num¬ 
bers containing the number A, then by use of the ruler and a single 
application of the compass we can construct y/H and hence any number 
of the form a + where a, 6 , are in F. 

We now show, conversely, that by a single application of the compass 
we can obtain only numbers of this form. For what the compass does 
in a construction is to define points (or their coordinates) as points of 
intersection of a circle with a straight line, or of two circles. A circle 
with center {, vi and radius r has the equation (rr — + ( 2 / — vf = 

hence, if t;, r are in F, the equation of the circle can be written in 
the form 

X* + j/* + 2ax + 2 / 92 / + 7 = 0 , 
with the coefficients of, ^3, 7 in F. A straight line, 

ax + by + c = 0, 

joining any two points whose coordinates are in F, has coefficients a, 6 , c 
in F, as we have seen on page 129. By eliminating y from these simulta¬ 
neous equations, we obtain for the ^-coordinate of a point of inter¬ 
section of the circle and line a quadratic equation of the form 

Ax' + Bx + C = 0, 

with coefficients A, 5, C in F (explicitly: A = a' + &^ F = 
2(ac + 6 'a — Qbp)y C = — 2bcff + hV). The solution is given by the 

formula 

_ -B ± VB* - 4X0 
" 2A 

which is of the form p + q-\/% with p, q, k in F. A similar formula 
holds for the y-coordinate of a point of intersection. 

Again, if we have two circles, 

x' + T/' + 2ax + 2fiy +7 =0, 

x' + 2 /* + 2 a'x + 2p'y + 7 ' = 0 , 

then by subtracting the second equation from the first we obtain the 
linear equation 

2(a - a^)x + 2(/5 - p')y + (y - 7 ') = 0, 

which may be solved with the equation of the first circle as before. 
In either case, the construction yields the x- and ^-coordinates of either 



132 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


(III I 


one or two new points, and these new quantities are of the form 
V + with p, k in f, In particular, of course, y/'k may itself 

belong to e.g., when A; = 4. Then the construction does not yield 
anything essentially new, and we remain in F. But in general this will 
not be the case. 

Exercises: Consider the circle with radius 2\/2 about the origin, and the line 
joining the points (1/2, 0), (4V% V^). Find the field F' determined by the 
coordinates of the points of intersection of the circle and the line. Do the same 
with respect to the intersection of the given circle with the circle with radius 
y/2/2 and center (0, 2y/2). 

Summarizing again: If certain quantities are given at the outset, then 
we can construct with a straightedge alone all the quantities in the 
field F generated by rational processes from the given quantities. 
Using the compass we can then extend the field F of constructible 
quantities to a wider extension field by selecting any number k of F, 
extracting the square root of A:, and constructing the field F' consisting 
of the numbers a + by/lCy where a and h are in F. F is called a subfield 
of F'; all quantities in F arc also contained in F', since in the expression 
a + hy/k wc may choose 6 = 0 . (It is assumed that y/k is a new 
number not lying in F, since otherwise the process of adjunction of 
\/fc would not lead to anything new, and F' would be identical with F.) 
We have shown that any step in a geometrical construction (drawing 
a line through two known points, drawing a circle with known center 
and radius, or marking the intersection of two known lines or circles) 
will either produce new quantities lying in the field already known to 
consist of constructible numbers, or, by the construction of a square 
root, will open up a new extension field of constructible numbers. 

The totality of all constructible numbers can now be described witli 
precision. We start with a given field Fo, defined by whatever quanti¬ 
ties are given at the outset, e.g. the field of rational numbers if only a 
single segment, chosen as the unit, is given. Next, by the adjunc¬ 
tion of \/^ 1 where fco is in Fo, but \/fci is not, we construct an extension 
field Fi of constructible numbers, consisting of all numbers of the form 
Oo + boy/l^y where Oo and bo may be any numbers of Fo. Then F 2 , 
a new extension field of Fi, is defined by the numbers ai + 6 i\/^, 
where ai and 61 are any numbers of Fi, and ki is some number of Fi 
whose square root does not lie in Fi. Repeating this procedure, we 
shall reach a field Fn after n adjunctions of square roots. Constructible 
numbers are those and only those which can be reached by such a sequence of 
extension fields; that is, which lie in a field Fa of the type described. The 



GENERAL THEORY 


133 


size of the number n of necessary extensions does not matter; in a way 
it measures the degree of complexity of the problem. 

The following example may illustrate the process. We want to reach 
the number 

Vs + V V 4/1 + + Vs + 5 . 

Let Fq denote the rational field. Putting h = 2, we obtain the field Fi , 
which contains the number 1 + \/2? We now take A:i = 1 + \/2 
and Ai = 3. As a matter of fact, 3 is in the original field Fo , and 
a fortiori in the field Ft , so that it is perfectly permissible to take 
kt * 3. We then take kt = I + \/2 + \/3^ and finally ki = 

Vvr + \/2 + \/3-f6. The field F^ thus constructed contains the 
desired number, for \/6 is also in F ^, since y/2 and \/3, and therefore 
their product, are in Ft and therefore also in Ft . 

Exercises: Verify that, starting with the rational field, the side of the regular 
2"‘-gon (see p. 124) is a constructible number, with n =» m — 1 . Determine the 
sequence of extension fields. Do the same for the numbers 

Vl + + V3 + V'b, {^/Z + VH)/!! + V7 - V3). 

(V2Tvt)(Ay2 + vrrvTTv^Tv?^^). 

2. All Constructible Numbers are Algebraic 

If the initial field F© is the rational field generated by a single segment, then 
all constructible numbers will be algebraic. (For the definition of algebraic 
numbers see p. 103). The numbers of the field Fi are roots of quadratic equa¬ 
tions, those of Fi are roots of fourth degree equations, and, in general, the num¬ 
bers of Fk are roots of equations of degree 2*, with rational coefficie nts. To show 
this for a field Ft we may first consider as an example x ^ V2 -f -y /3 _|_ 
have {X - >/ 2 )* - 3 -f ^ 2 , ** -}- 2 - 2V2x - 3 + V 2 , or oj* - 1 * V^2x -f 1 ), 
a quadratic equation with coefficients in a field Fi . By squaring, we finally 
obtain 

(x* - 1)* - 2(2x + 1)*, 

which is an equation of the fourth degree with rational coefficients. 

In general, any number in a field Ft has the form 

(4) X - p + gVw, 

where p, Qy w are in a field Fi , and hence have the form p * o 4- by/Ty q ■■ 
c -h w ^ e where a, 6 , c, d, e,/, s are rational. From (4) we have 

X* — 2px + p* - 



134 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[ HI] 


where all the coefficients are in a field Ft , generated by Vs. Hence this equa¬ 
tion may be rewritten in the form 

+ w* -h t; * Vsirx 4* 0, 

where r, w, v are rational. By squaring both sides we obtain an equation 
of the fourth degree 

(6) (jT* + ux + »)• ■» s{rx -f 0* 

with rational coefficients, as stated. 

Exercises'. 1 ) Find the equations with rational coefficients for a) « — 
V 2 + V3: b) * » + -v/3: c) * = i/Vs + Vs- 

2) Find by a similar method equations of the eighth degree for a) x — 

V2 + V 2 +^: b) * - + Vl +v^: c) * = 1 + -y/S + V 3 + 

To prove the theorem in general for x in a field F* with arbitrary fc, we show 
by the procedure used above that x satisfies a quadratic equation with coeffi¬ 
cients in a field Fjui . Repeating the procedure, we find that x satisfies an equa¬ 
tion of degree 2* «= 4 with coefficients in a field F*-i, etc. 

Exercise: Complete the general proof by using mathematical induction to 
show that X satisfies an equation of degree 2* with coefficients in a field Fk^i , 
0 < I < k. This statement for I * A: is the desired theorem. 

♦§3. THE UNSOLVABILITY OF THE THREE GREEK PROBLEMS 
1. Doubling the Cube 

Now we are well prepared to investigate the old problems of trisecting 
the angle, doubling the cube, and constructing the regular heptagon. 
We consider first the problem of doubling the cube. If the given cube 
has an edge of unit length, its volume will be the cubic unit; it is required 
that we find the edge x of a cube with twice this volume. The required 
edge X will therefore satisfy the simple cubic equation 

( 1 ) - 2 = 0 . 

Our proof that this number x cannot be constructed by ruler and compass 
alone is indirect. We assume tentatively that a construction is possible. 
According to the preceding discussion this means that x lies in some 
field Fk obtained, as above, from the rational field by successive exten¬ 
sions through adjunction of square roots. As we shall show, this 
assumption leads to an absurd consequence. 

We already know that x cannot lie in the rational field Fq , for ^2 
is an irrational number (see Exercise 1, p. 60). Hence x can only 
lie in some extension field F*, where A; is a positive integer. We may 
as well assume that k is the least positive integer such that x lies in 
some Fk . It follows that x can be written in the form 



DOUBLING THE CUBE 


135 


where p, and w belong to some Fu^i , but y/w does not. Now, by a 
simple but important type of algebraic reasoning, we shall show that if 
X = p + is a solution of the cubic equation (1), then y = 

p — q\/w is also a solution. Since x is in the field F* , x* and x* — 2 
are also in F*, and we have 

(2) X* — 2 = a + h\/wy 

where a and b are in F*_i. By an easy calculation we can show that 
a = p* + Spq^w — 2 , 6 = Sp^q + q^w. If we put 

y = p - qy/w, 

then a substitution of — g' for q in these expressions for a and h shows 
that 

(2') I/* — 2 = a — hy/w. 

Now X was supposed to be a root of x^ — 2 = 0 , hence 

( 3 ) a + by/ ii; = 0 . 

This implies—-and here k the key to the argument—that a and b must 
both be zero. If b were not zero, we would infer from ( 3 ) that y/w = 
—a/6. But then y/w would be a number of the field F*«i in which a 
and 6 lie, contrary to our assumption. Hence 6 = 0, and it follows 
immediately from ( 3 ) that a = 0 also. 

Now that we have shown that a = 6 = 0 , we immediately infer 
from (2') that y = p — qy/wk also a solution of the cubic equation (1), 
since t/* — 2 is equal to zero. Furthermore, y 9^ x, i.e. x — 2/ 0; 

for, X — 2/ = 2 qy/w can only vanish if g = 0, and if this were so then 
X = p would lie in F*-!, contrary to our assumption. 

We have therefore shown that, if x = p + qy/w is a root of the 
cubic equation (1), then y = p -- q^w is a different root of this equa¬ 
tion. This leads immediately to a contradiction. For there is only 
one real number x which is a cube root of 2, the other cube roots of 2 
being imaginary (see p. 98 ); 2/ = P ~ qy/w is obviously real, since 
p, g, and y/w were real. 

Thus our basic assumption has led to an absurdity, and hence is 
proved to be wrong; a solution of (1) cannot lie in a field F*, so that 
doubling the cube by ruler and compass is impossible. 

2 . A Theorem on Cubic Equations 

Our concluding algebraic argument was especially adapted to the par¬ 
ticular problem at hand. If we want to dispose of the two other Greek 



136 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


I III] 

problems, it is desirable to proceed on a more general basis. All three 
problems depend algebraically on cubic equations. It is a fundamental 
fact concerning the cubic equation 

(4) 2* + 02* + + c = 0 

that, if xi, Xi, Xs are the three roots of this equation, then 

(5) Xi + X2 + Xs = -o.t 

Let us consider any cubic equation (4) where the coefficients o, 6, c are 
rational numbers. It may be that one of the roots of the equation is 
rational; for example, the equation a:* — 1 = 0 has the rational root 1, 
while the two other roots, given by the quadratic equation x^ + x + 1 = 
0, are necessarily imaginary. But we can easily prove the general theo¬ 
rem : If a cubic equation with rational coefficients has no rational rooty then 
none of its roots is constructible starting from the rational field Fo. 

Again we give the proof by an indirect method. Suppose x were a 
constructible root of (4). Then x would lie in the last field Fk of some 
chain of extension fields, Fo, Fi, • • • , F*, as above. We may assume 
that k is the smallest integer such that a root of the cubic equation (4) 
lies in an extension field F*. Certainly k must be greater than zero, 
since in the statement of the theorem it is assumed that no root x lies 
in the rational field Fo. Hence x can be written in the form 

X = p + q\^y 

where p, Qj w are in the preceding field, F*_i, but is not. It follows, 
exactly as for the special equation, 2 ’ — 2 = 0, of the preceding article, 
that another number of F* , 

y = p - qy/w, 

will also be a root of the equation (4). As before, we see that q ^ Q 
and hence x ^ y. 

From (5) we know that the third root u of the equation (4) is given 
byu = —a — X — y. But since x + y = 2p, this means that 

u = —a -- 2 p, 

tThe polynomial 2 * az* + hz c may be factored into the product 
(z — xi)(z — Xi)(z — xi), where Xi, Xt, Xt, are the three roots of the equation 
(4) (see p. 101). Hence 

2 * + az* + 62 + c • 2 * — (xi + 2 a -f* Xi) 2 * + (xiXa XiXi + 21 X 1)2 — XiXfXi, 
so that, since the coefficient of each power of z must be the same on both sides, 

— a ■■ 2 i -f 2 i + 2 | , 6 ■■ XiXa -|- XiXi “ 1 “ XaXi , —C ■■ * 2 iXiXt . 



THEOREM ON CUBIC EQUATIONS 


137 


where y/w has disappeared, so that w is a number in the field Fh -\. 
This contradicts the hypothesis that k is the smallest number such that 
some Fk contains a root of (4). Hence the hypothesis is absurd, and 
no root of (4) can lie in such a field F* . The general theorem is proved. 
On the basis of this theorem, a construction by ruler and compass alone 
is proved to be impossible if the algebraic equivalent of the problem is 
the solution of a cubic equation with no rational roots. This equivalence 
was at once obvious for the problem of doubling the cube, and will now 
be established for the other two Greek problems. 

3. Trisecting the Angle 

We shall now prove that the trisection of the angle by ruler and 
compass alone is in general impossible. Of course, there are angles, such 
as 90° and 180°, for which the trisection can be performed. What we 
have to show is that the trisection cannot be effected by a procedure 
valid for every angle. For the proof, it is quite sufficient to exhibit 
only one angle that cannot be trisected, since a valid general method 
would have to cover every single example. Hence the non-existence of 
a general method will be proved if we can demonstrate, for example, 
that the angle 60° cannot be trisected by ruler and compass alone. 

We can obtain an algebraic equivalent of this problem in different 
ways; the simplest is to consider an angle B as given by its cosine: cos B — g, 
Then the problem is equivalent to that of finding the quantity x = 
cos (^/3). By a simple trigonometrical formula (see p. 97), the cosine 
of B/Z is connected with that of B by the equation 

cos ^ = g = 4 cos’ (0/3) — 3 cos (0/3). 

In other words, the problem of trisecting the angle 0 with cos 0 = 
amounts to constructing a solution of the cubic equation 

(6) 4z^ - 3z - g 0. 

To show that this cannot in general be done, we take 0 = 60°, so 
that g = cos 60° = Equation (6) then becomes 

(7) 82’ ~ 62 = 1. 

By virtue of the theorem proved in the preceding article, we need 
only show that this equation has no rational root. Let t; = 2z. Then 
the equation becomes 

(8) w* - 3i; « 1. 



138 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


(IIIl 


If there were a rational number v = r/s satisfying this equation, where r 
and 8 areintegerswithoutacommonfactor > 1, we should haver* — 3sV = 
«*. From this it follows that s* = r(r* — 3s*) is divisible by r, which 
means that r and s have a common factor unless r — ±1. Likewise, 
8* is a factor of r* = s*(s + 3r), which means that r and s have a common 
factor unless s = ±1. Since we assumed that r and s had no common 
factor, we have shown that* the only rational numbers which could 
possibly satisfy equation (8) are +1 or —1. By substituting +1 and 
— 1 for V in equation (8) we see that neither value satisfies it. Hence 
(8), and consequently (7), has no rational root, and the impossibility of 
trisecting the angle is proved. 

The theorem that the general angle cannot be trisected with ruler and compass 
alone is true only when the ruler is regarded as an instrument for drawing a 
straight line through any two given points and nothing else. In our general 



Fig. 30. Archimedes' trisection of an angle. 


characterization of constructible numbers the use of the ruler was always limited 
to this operation only. By permitting other uses of the ruler the totality of 
possible constructions may be greatly extended. The following method for tri¬ 
secting the angle, found in the works of Archimedes, is a good example. 

Let an arbitrary angle x be given, as in Fig. 36. Extend the base of the 
angle to the left, and swing a semicircle with 0 as center and arbitrary radius r. 
Mark two points A and B on the edge of the ruler such that AB * r. Keeping 
the point B on the semicircle, slide the ruler into the position where A lies on 
the extended base of the angle x, while the edge of the ruler passes through the 
intersection of the terminal side of the angle x with the semicircle about 0. With 
the ruler in this position draw a straight line, making an angle y with the ex¬ 
tended base of the original angle x. 

Exercise: Show that this construction actually yields y = x/3. 

4. The Regular Heptagon 

We shall now consider the problem of finding the side x of a regular 
heptagon inscribed in the unit circle. The simplest way to dispose of 
this problem is by means of complex numbers (see Ch. II, §6). We 



THE REGULAR HEPTAGON 


139 


know that the vertices of the heptagon are given by the roots of the 
equation 

(9) 2 ’ - 1 = 0, 

the coordinates x, y of the vertices being considered as the real and 
imaginary parts of complex numbers z = a: + yi. One root of this 
equation is 2 = 1, and the others are the roots of the equation 

(10) = 2 * + 2 * + 2 ‘ + 2 ’ + 2 * + 2 + 1 = 0, 
z — 1 

obtained from (9) by factoring out 2 — 1 (see p. 99). Dividing (10) 
by 2 ’, we obtain the equation 

(11) z’ + 1 / 2 ’ + 2 * + 1/z* + 2 + 1/2 + 1 = 0. 

By a simple algebraic transformation this may be written in the form 

(12) (2 + 1 / 2 )' - 3(2 + 1 / 2 ) + (2 + 1 / 2 )’ - 2 + (2 + 1/z) + 1 •= 0. 
Denoting the quantity z + I /2 by y, we find from (12) that 

(13) y^ + y‘‘ -2y-\= 0. 

We know that 2 , the seventh root of unity, is given by 

(14) z — cos (f> + i sin 0, 

where 0 = 360°/7 is the angle subtended at the center of the circle by 
the edge of the regular heptagon; likewise we know from Exercise 2, 
page 97, that I /2 = cos — i sin 0, so that 2 / = 2 + I /2 = 2 cos <t>. 
If we can construct y, we can *^lso construct cos </>, and conversely. 
Hence, if we can prove that y is not constructible, we shall at the same 
time show that 2 , and therefore the heptagon, is not constructible. 
Thus, considering the theorem of Article 2, it remains merely to show 
that the equation (13) has no rational roots. This, too, is proved 
indirectly. Assume that (13) has a rational root r/ 5 , where r and s are 
integers having no common factor. Then we have 

(15) / + rh - 2rs" - = 0; 

whence it is seen as above that r* has the factor s, and s* the factor r. 
Since r and 5 have no common factor, each must be =fcl; therefore 
y can have only the possible values +1 and —1, if it is to be rational. 
On substituting these numbers in the equation, we see that neither of 
them satisfies it. Hence y, and therefore the edge of the regular hepta¬ 
gon, is not constructible. 



140 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


I nil 


5. Remarks on the Problem of Squaring the Circle 

We have been able to dispose of the problems of doubling the cube, 
trisecting the angle, and constructing the regular heptagon, by com¬ 
paratively elementary methods. The problem of squaring the circle is 
much more difficult and requires the technique of advanced mathe¬ 
matical analysis. Since a circle with radius r has the area irr*, the 
problem of constructing a square with area equal to that of a given circle 
whose radius is the unit length 1 amounts to the construction of a 
segment of length \/ir as the edge of the required square. This seg¬ 
ment will be constructible if and only if the number ir is constructible. 
In the light of our general characterization of constructible numbers, 
we could show the impossibility of squaring the circle by showing that 
the number v cannot be contained in any field Fk that can be reached 
by the successive adjunction of square roots to the rational field Fo . 
Since all the members of any such field are algebraic numbers, i.e. 
numbers that satisfy algebraic equations with integer coefficients, it 
will be sufficient if the number t can be shown to be not algebraic, i.e. 
to be transcendental (see p. 104). 

The technique necessary for proving that x is a transcendental number 
was created by Charles Hermite (1822-1905), who proved the number 
e to be transcendental. By a slight extension of Hermite^s method 
F. Lindemann succeeded (1882) in proving the transcendence of x, and 
thus definitely settled the age-old question of squaring the circle. The 
proof is within the reach of the student of advanced analysis, but is 
beyond the scope of this book. 


PART II 

VARIOUS METHODS FOR PERFORMING CONSTRUCTIONS 

§4. GEOMETRICAL TRANSFORMATIONS. INVERSION 

1. General Remarks 

In the second part of this chapter we shall discuss in a systematic 
way some general principles that may be applied to construction prob¬ 
lems. Many of these problems can be more clearly viewed from the 
general standpoint of ‘^geometrical transformations”; instead of study¬ 
ing an individual construction, we shall consider simultaneously a whole 
class of problems connected by certain processes of transformation. 
The clarifying power of the concept of a class of geometrical transforma- 



GENERAL REMARKS 


141 


tions is by no means restricted to construction problems, but affects 
almost everything in geometry. In Chapters IV and V we shall deal 
with this general aspect of geometrical transformations. Here we shall 
study a particular type of transformation, the inversion of the plane 
in a circle, which is a generalization of ordinary reflection in a straight 
line. 

By a transformation^ or mapping^ of the plane onto itself we mean a 
rule which assigns to every point P of the plane another point P', called 
the image of P under the transformation; the point P is called the 
antecederU of P'. A simple example of such a transformation is given 
by the reflection of the plane in a given straight line L as in a mirror: 
a point P on one side of L has as its image the point P', on the other side 
of L, and such that L is the perpendicular bisector of the segment PP'. 
A transformation may leave certain points of the plane fixed; in the 
case of a reflection this is true of the points on L. 



Ftf. 37. Reflection of a point in a line. 


Fig. 38. Inversion of a point in a circle. 


Other examples of transformations are the rotations of the plane about 
a fixed point 0, the parallel translationsy which move every point a dis¬ 
tance d in a given direction (such a transformation has no fixed points), 
and, more generally, the rigid motions of the plane, which may be thought 
of as compounded of rotations and parallel translations. 

The particular class of transformations of interest to us now are the 
inversions with respect to circles. (These are sometimes known as cir¬ 
cular reflections, because to a certain approximation they represent the 
relation between original and image in reflection by a circular mirror.) 
In a fixed plane let C be a given circle with center 0 (called the center 
of inversion) and radius r. The image of a point P is defined to be the 
point P' lying on the line OP on the same side of 0 as P and such that 

(1) OP OP' == 

The points P and P' are said to be inverse points with respect to C. 
From this definition it follows that, if P' is the inverse point of P, 




142 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[HI] 


then P is the inverse of P'. An inversion interchanges the inside and 
outside of the circle C, since for OP < r we have OP' > r, and for 
OP > r, we have OP' < r. The only points of the plane that remain 
fixed under the inversion are the points on the circle C itself. 

Rule (1) does not define an image for the center 0. It is clear that 
if a moving point P approaches 0, the image P' will recede farther and 
farther out in the plane. For this reason we sometimes say that 0 itself 
corresponds to thepoint at infinityxmder the inversion. The usefulness of 
this terminology lies in the fact that it enables us to state that an inver¬ 
sion sets up a correspondence between the points of the plane and their 
images which is biunique without exception: each point of the plane has 
one and only one image and is itself the image of one and only one 
point. This property is shared by all the transformations previously 
considered. 



Elf. 89. Inyenion of a lino L in a oirolo. 


2. Properties of Inversion 

The most important property of an inversion is that it transforms 
straight lines and circles into straight lines and circles. More pre¬ 
cisely, we shall show that after an inversion 

(a) a line through 0 becomes a line through 0, 

(b) a line not through 0 becomes a circle through 0, 

(c) a circle through 0 becomes a line not through 0, 

(d) a circle not through 0 becomes a circle not through 0. 

Statement (a) is obvious, since from the definition of inversion any 

point on the straight line has as image another point on the same line^ 
so that although the points on the line are interchanged, the line as a 
whole is transformed into itself. 

To prove statement (b), drop a perpendicular from 0 to the straight 
line L (Fig. 39). Let A be the point where this perpendicular meets L, 



PROPERTIES OF INVERSION 


143 


and let A' be the inverse point to A. Mark any point P on L, and let P' 
be its inverse point. Since OA'-OA = OP'‘OP = r*, it follows that 

OP' OA’ 

Hence the triangles OP'A' and OAP are similar and angle OP'A' is a 
right angle. From elementary geometry it follows that P' lies on the 
circle K with diameter OA', so that the inverse of L is this circle. This 
proves (b). Statement (c) now follows from the fact that since the in¬ 
verse of L is FT, the inverse of K is L, 

It remains to prove statement (d). Let K be any circle not passing 
through 0, with center M and radius k. To obtain its image, we draw 
a line through 0 intersecting K sA A and B, and then determine how the 



images A', B' vary when the line through 0 intersects K in all possible 
ways. Denote the distances OA, OB, OA', OB', OM by a, b, a', b', m, 
and let t be the length of a tangent to K from 0. We have aa' = 
bb' = /, by definition of inversion, and ab = <*, by an elementary geo¬ 
metrical property of the circle. If we divide the first relations by 
the second, we get 

a'/b = b'/a = rV<* = c*, 

where c* is a constant that depends only upon r and t, and is the same 
for all positions of A and B. Through A' we draw a line parallel to BAf 
meeting OM at Q. Let OQ = q and A'Q = p. Then q/m = a'/b = 
p/k, or 

q = ma'/b = TMC*, p = ka'/b = kc*. 

This means that for all positions of A and B, Q will always be the same 
point on OM, and the distance A'Q will always have the same value. 



144 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


I ml 


Likewise B'Q = p, since o'/6 = V/a. Thus the images of all points 
A, B on K are points whose distance from Q is always p, i.e. the image 
of £ is a circle. This proves (d). 

3. Geometrical Constructioii of Inverse Points 

The following theorem will be useful in Article 4 of this section: The 
point P' inverse to a given point P with respect to a circle C may be con¬ 
structed geometrically by the tise of the compass alone. We consider first 
the case where the given point P is exterior to C. With OP as radius 
and P as center we describe an arc intersecting C at the points R and S. 
With these two points as centers we describe arcs with radius r which 



Fig. 41. loveraion of an outaide point in a circle. 


intersect at 0 and at a point P' on the line OP. In the isosceles triangles 
ORP and ORP', 

Ti^ORP = ^POR = iS^OP'R, 
so that these triangles are similar, and therefore 


OP 

OR 


OR 

OP'’ 


i.e. OP.OP' 


Hence P' is the required inverse of P, which was to be constructed. 

If the given point P lies inside C the same construction and proof 
hold, provided that the circle of radius OP about P intersects C in two 
points. If not, we can reduce the construction of the inverse point P' 
to the previous case by the following simple artifice. 

First we observe that with the compass alone we can find a point C 
on the line joining two given points A, 0 and such that AO = OC. 
To do this, we draw a circle about 0 with radius r = AO, and mark off 
on this circle, starting from A, the points P, Q, C such that AP = 
PQ -■ QC r. Then C is the desired point, as is seen from the fact 




CONSTRUCTION OF INVERSE POINTS 


145 


that the triangles AOP^ OPQy OQC are equilateral, so that OA and OC 
form an angle of 180®, and OC = OQ = -40. By repeating this pro¬ 
cedure, we can easily extend -40 any desired number of times. Inci¬ 
dentally, since the length of the segment -4Q is rV^ as the reader can 
easily verify, we have at the same time constructed \/3 from the unit 
without using the straightedge. 

Now we can find the inverse of any point P inside the circle C. First 
we find a point R on the line OP whose distance from 0 is an integral 
multiple of OP and which lies outside C, 

OR = n.OP. 

We can do this by successively measuring off the distance OP with the 
compass until we land outside C. Now we find the point R' inverse 
to R by the construction previously given. Then 

r* = OR'-OR = OR'.(n-OP) = (n-OR')-OP. 

Therefore the point P' for which OP' = n»0R' is the desired inverse. 



Fif. 43. Doubling of • sogmont. 



4. How to Bisect a Segment and Find the Center of a Circle with the 

Compass Alone 

Now that we have learned how to find the inverse of a given point by 
using the compass alone, we can perform some interesting constructions. 
For example, we consider the problem of finding the point midway 
between two given points A and B by using the compass alone (no 
straight lines may be drawn!). Here is the solution: Draw the circle 
with radius AB about B as center, and mark off three arcs with radius 
AB, starting from A, The final point C will be on the line AB, with 
AB = BC, Now draw the circle with radius AB and center A, and 
let C' be the point inverse to C with respect to this circle. Then 

AC'.AC = AB* 

AC'.2AB = AB* 

2AC' = AB. 

Hence C' is the desired midpoint 



146 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


(HI) 


Another compass construction using inverse points is that of finding 
the center of a circle whose circumference only is given, the center being 
unknown. We choose any point P on the circumference and about it 
draw a circle intersecting the given circle in the points R and S. With 
these as centers we draw arcs with the radii RP — SP, intersecting 
at the point Q. A comparison with Figure 41 shows that the unknown 
center, O', is inverse to Q with respect to the circle about P, so that Q' 
can be constructed by compass alone. 



Fif. 44. Finding the midpoint of a segment. 



Fig. 45. Finding the center of a oirole. 


§5. CONSTRUCTIONS WITH OTHER TOOLS. MASCHERONI 

CONSTRUCTIONS WITH COMPASS ALONE 

'*'1. A Classical Construction for Doubling the Cube 

Until now we have considered only problems of geometrical construc¬ 
tion that use the straightedge and compass alone. When other instru¬ 
ments are allowed the variety of possible constructions naturally be¬ 
comes more extensive. For example, the Greeks solved the problem of 
doubling the cube in the following way. Consider (as in Fig. 46) a rigid 
right angle MZN and a movable right-angled cross B, VW, PQ. Two 
additional edges RS and TU are allowed to slide perpendicularly to the 
arms of the right angle. On the cross let two fixed points E and G be 
chosen such that GB = a and BE = / have prescribed lengths. By 
placing the cross so that the points E and G lie on NZ and MZ respec¬ 
tively, and sliding the edges TU and RS, we can bring the entire appa¬ 
ratus into a position where we have a rectangle ADEZ through whose 
vertices A, D, E pass the arms BW, BQ, BV of the cross. Such an 
arrangement is always possible if / > o. We see at once that a:x = 
x:y y:f, whence, if / is set equal to 2a in the apparatus, x* = 2a*. 
Hence x will be the edge of a cube whose volume is double that of the 
cube with edge a. This is what is required for doubling the cube. 



RESTRICTION TO USE OF COMPASS ALONE 


147 


2. Restriction to the Use of the Compass Alone 

While it is only natural that by permitting a greater variety of instru¬ 
ments we can solve a large collection of construction problems, one 
might expect that more restrictions on the tools allowed would narrow 
the class of possible constructions. Hence it was a very surprising dis¬ 
covery, made by the Italian Mascheroni (1750-1800), that all geometrical 
constructions possible by straightedge and compass canbemade by the compass 
alone. Of course, one cannot draw the straight line joining two points with¬ 



out a straightedge, so that this fundamental construction is not really cov¬ 
ered by the Mascheroni theory. Instead, one must think of a straight 
line as given by any two points on it. By using the compass alone, one 
can find the point of intersection of two lines given in this way, and 
likewise the intersections of a given circle with a straight line. 

Perhaps the simplest example of a Mascheroni construction is the 
doubling of a given segment AB, The solution was given on page 144. 
On page 145 we bisected a straight segment. Now we shall solve the 
problem of bisecting a given arc AB of a circle with given center 0. The 



148 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


I mi 


construction is as follows: from A and B as centers, swing two arcs with 
radius AO. From 0 lay off arcs OP and OQ equal to AB. Then swing 
two arcs with PB and QA as radii and with P and Q as centers, inter¬ 
secting at R. Finally, with OR as radius, describe an arc with either 
P or 0 as center until it intersects AB\ this point of intersection is the 
required midpoint of the arc AB. The proof is left as an exercise for 
the reader. 

It would be impossible to prove Mascheroni’s general theorem by 
actually giving a construction by compass alone for every construction 
possible with ruler and compass, since the number of possible construc¬ 
tions is not finite. But we may arrive at the same goal by proving 


A 




Fig. 47. Bisecting an arc with the compass. 

that each of the following four fundamental constructions is possible 
with compass alone: 

1. To draw a circle with given center and radius. 

2. To find the points of intersection of two circles. 

3. To find the points of intersection of a straight line and a circle. 

4. To find the points of intersection of two straight lines. 

Any geometrical construction in the usual sense, ruler and compass per¬ 
mitted, consists of a finite succession of these elementary constructions. 
The first two of *these are clearly possible with the compass alone. The 
solutions of the more diflScult problems 3 and 4 depend on the properties 
of inversion developed in the preceding section. 

Let us solve problem 3, that of finding the points of intersection of a 
circle C and a straight line given by the two points A and B. With 
centers A and B and radii AO and BO, respectively, draw two arcs, 
intersecting again at P. Now determine the point Q inverse to P with 
respect to C, by the construction with compass alone given on p. 144. 
Draw the circle with center Q and radius QO (this circle must inter¬ 
sect C ); the points of intersection X and X' of this circle with the given 
circle C are the required points. To prove this we need only show that 



RESTRICTION TO USE OF COMPASS ALONE 


149 


X And X' are equidistant from 0 and P, since A and B are so by con¬ 
struction. This follows from the fact that the inverse of Q is a point 
whose distance from X and X' is equal to the radius of C (p. 144). 
Note that the circle through X, X', and 0 is the inverse of the line AB, 
since this circle and the line AB intersect C at the same points. (Points 
on the circumference of a circle are their own inverses.) 

The construction is invalid only if the line AB goes through the center 
of C. But then the points of intersection can be found, by the con¬ 
struction given on page 148, as the midpoints of arcs on C obtained 
by swinging around B an arbitrary circle which intersects C in Bi 
and Bt. 




Fig. 48. Interseotion of oirole and line not Fig. 49. Intersection of circle and line through center, 
through center. 


The method of determining the circle inverse to the line joining two 
given points permits an immediate solution of problem 4. Let the lines 
be given by AB and /I'B' (Fig. 50). Draw any circle C in the plane, 
and by the preceding method find the circles inverse to AB and A'B\ 
These circles intersect at 0 and at a point Y, The point X inverse 
to y is the required point of intersection, and can be constructed by 
the process already used. That X is the required point is evident from 
the fact that Y is the only point that is inverse to a point of both AB 
and hence the point X inverse to Y must lie on both AB and A^B\ 
With these two constructions we have completed the proof of the 
equivalence between Mascheroni constructions using only the compass 
and the conventional geometrical constructions with ruler and compass. 



150 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[IIIl 


We have taken no pains to provide elegant solutions for individual 
problems, since our aim was rather to give some insight into the general 
scope of the Mascheroni constructions. We shall, however, give as an 
example the construction of the regular pentagon. More precisely, we 
shall find five points on a circle which will be the vertices of a regular 
inscribed pentagon. 



Fif. 10. InUrsectioQ of two lines. 

Let A be any point on the given circle K, The side of a regular in¬ 
scribed hexagon is equal to the radius of K, Hence we can find points 
B. C.DonK such that ^ = 60° (Fig. 51). With A 



D 


Fig. 51. Construetion of the regular pentagon- 



RESTRICTION TO USE OF COMPASS ALONE 


151 


andD as centers s^ndAC as radius we draw arcs meeting at X. Then if 0 
is the center of K, an arc about A of radius OX will meet K at the 
midpoint F of BC (see p. 148). Now with the radius of K we draw 
arcs about F meeting if at G and H. Let 7 be a point whose distance 
from G and H is OX, and which is separated from X by 0. Then A Y 
will be equal to a side of the required pentagon. The proof is left as 
an exercise for the reader. Note that only three different radii were 
used in the construction. 

In 1928 the Danish mathematician Hjelmslev found in a Copenhagen 
bookstore a copy of a book, Euclides DanicuSj published in 1672 by an 
obscure author G. Mohr. From the title one might infer that this 
work was simply a version of, or a commentary on Euclides Elements, 
But when Hjelmslev examined the book, he found to his surprise that 
it contained essentially the Mascheroni problem and its complete solu¬ 
tion, found long before Mascheroni. 

Exercises: The following is a description of Mohr^s constructions. Check 
their validity. Why do they solve the Mascheroni problem? 

1 ) On a segment AB of length p erect a perpendicular segment BC. (Hint: 
Extend AB by a point D such that AB — BD. Draw arbitrary circles around 
A and D and thus determine C.) 

2 ) Two segments of length p and q with p > q are given somewhere in the 

plane. Find a segment of the length x *= — g* by making use of 1 ). 

3) From a given segment a construct the segment ay/2. (Hint: Observe that 

(ay/2)' - (av^)* - a*.) _ 

4) With given segments p and q find a segment x = \/p* -f q*. (Hint: Use the 
relation x* = 2p' — (p' — q').) Find other similar constructions. 

5) Using the previous results, find segments of length p q and p — ^ if 
segments of length p and q are given somewhere in the plane. 

6 ) Check and prove the following construction for the midpoint M of a given 
segment AB of length a. On the extension of AB find C and D such that 
CA = AB = BD. Construct the isosceles triangle ECD with EC = ED — 2a, and 
find M as the intersection of the circles with diameters EC and ED. 

7) Find the orthogonal projection of a point A on a line BC. 

8 ) Find x such that x:a =■ p:q, if a, p, and q are given segments. 

9) Find x =* a 6 , if o and h are given segments. 

Inspired by Mascheroni, Jacob Steiner (1796-1863) tried to single 
out as a tool the straightedge instead of the compass. Of course, the 
straightedge alone does not lead out of a given number field, and hence 
cannot suffice for all geometrical constructions in the classical sense. 
It is all the more remarkable that Steiner was able to restrict *the use 
of the compass to a single application. He proved that all constructions 
in the plane which are possible with straightedge and compass are 



152 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[HI 


possible with the straightedge alone, provided that a single fixed circle 
and its center are given. These constructions require projective meth¬ 
ods and will be indicated later (see page 197). 

* This circle and its center cannot be dispensed with. For example, if a circle, 
but not its center, is given,^ it is impossible to construct the latter by the use of 
the straightedge alone. To prove this we shall make use of a fact that will be 
discussed later (p. 220): There exists a transformation of the plane into itself 
which has the following properties: (a) the given circle is fixed under the trans¬ 
formation. (b) Any straight line is carried into a straight line, (c) The center 
of the circle is carried into some other point. The mere existence of such a trans¬ 
formation shows the impossibility of constructing with the straightedge alone the 
center of the given circle. For, whatever the construction might be, it would 
consist in drawing a certain number of straight lines and finding their intersec¬ 
tions with one another and with the given circle. Now if the whole figure, con¬ 
sisting of the given circle together with all points and lines of the construction, 
is subjected to the transformation whose existence we have assumed, the trans¬ 
formed figure will satisfy all the requirements of the construction, but will yield 
as result a point other than the center of the given circle. Hence such a con¬ 
struction is impossible. 

3. Drawing with Meehanical Instruments. 

Mechanical Curves. Cycloids 

By devising mechanisms to draw curves other than the circle and the 
straight line we may greatly enlarge the domain of constructible figures. 
For example, if we have an instrument for drawing the hyperbolas 
xy = A, and another for drawing parabolas y = ax^ + hx + c, then 
any problem leading to a cubic equation, 

(1) ax^ + hx^ + cx = ky 

may be solved by construction, using only these instruments. For if 
we set 

(2) xy ^ k, y ^ ax^ + hx + Cy 

then solving equation (1) amounts to solving the simultaneous equa¬ 
tions (2) by eliminating y] i.e. the roots of (1) are the a;-co6rdinates of 
the points of intersection of the hyperbola and parabola in (2). Thus 
the solutions of (1) can be constructed if we have instruments with 
which to draw the hyperbola and parabola of equations (2). 

Since antiquity mathematicians have known that many interesting 
curves can be defined and drawn by simple mechanical instruments. 
Of these ‘‘mechanical curves” the cycloids are among the most remark¬ 
able. Ptolemy (circa 200 A.D.) used them in a very ingenious way to 
describe the movements of the olanets in the heavens. 



DRAWING WITH MECHANICAL INSTRUMENTS 


153 



The simplest cycloid is the curve described by a fixed point on the 
circumference of a circle which rolls without slipping along a straight 
line. Figure 53 shows four positions of the point P on the rolling circle. 
The general appearance of the cycloid is that of a series of arches resting 
on the line. 



p, 


Fif. 6S. Th« oydoid. 



Variations of this curve may be obtained by choosing the point P 
either inside the circle (as on a spoke of a wheel) or on an extension of 


154 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[IIIl 


its radius (as on the flange of a train wheel). Figure 54 illustrates these 
two curves. 



A further variation of the cycloid is obtained by allowing a circle to 
roll, not along a straight line, but on another circle. If the rolling 
circle c of radius r remains internally tangent to the larger circle C of 
radius 72, the locus generated by a point fixed on the circumference of c 
is called a hypocychid. 



If the circle c describes the whole circumference of C just once, the 
point P will return to its original position only if the radius of C is an 
integral multiple of that of c. Figure 55 shows the case where R = 3r. 
More generally, if the radius of C is m/n times that of c, the hypocycloid 
will close up after n circuits around (7, and will consist of m arches. 
An interesting special case occurs if 72 = 2r. Any point P of the inner 
circle will then describe a diameter of the larger circle (Fig. 56). We 
propose the proof of this fact as a problem for the reader. 


DRAWING WITH MECHANICAL INSTRUMENTS 


155 


Still another type of cycloid can be generated by means of a rolling 
circle remaining externally tangent to a fixed circle. Such a curve is 
called an epicycloid. 



Fig. 66. Straight motion by points on a circle rolling in a circle of double radius. 

*4. Linkages. Peaucellier’s and Hart’s Inversors 

We leave for the present the subject of cycloids (they will appear 
again in an unexpected place) to consider other methods of generating 
curves. The simplest mechanical instruments for tracing curves are the 
linkages. A linkage consists of a set of rigid rods, connected in some 
manner at movable joints, in such a way that the whole system has 
just enough freedom to allow a point on it to describe a certain curve. 
The compass is really a simple linkage, consisting in principle of a single 
rod which is fastened at one point. 

Linkages have long been used in machine construction. One of the 
historically famous examples, the ^Watt parallelogram,” was invented 
by James Watt to solve the problem of linking the piston of his steam 
engine to a point on the flywheel in such a way that the rotation of the 
flywheel would move the piston along a straight line. Watt’s solution 
was only approximate, and despite the efforts of many distinguished 
mathematicians, the problem of constructing a linkage to move a point 
precisely on a straight line remained unsolved. At one time, when 
proofs for the impossibility of solutions to certain problems were attract¬ 
ing wide attention, the conjecture was made that the construction of 
such a linkage was impossible. It was a great surprise when, in 1864, a 
French naval officer. Peaucellier, invented a simple linkage that solved 



156 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


I nil 


the problem. With the introduction of efficient lubricants the technical 
problem for steam engines had by then lost its significance. 



The purpose of Peaucellier’s linkage is to convert circular into recti¬ 
linear motion. It is based on the theory of inversion discussed in §4. 
As shown in Figure 58, the linkage consists of seven rigid rods; two of 
length ty four of length s, and a seventh of arbitrary length. 0 and R 
are two fixed points, placed so that OR = PR, The entire apparatus is 
free to move, subject to the given conditions. We shall prove that, 



Fig- 68. Peauoellier's tnnaformation of rotation into true rectilinear motion. 

as P describes an are about R with radius PR, Q describes a segment of a 
straight line. Denoting the foot of the perpendicular from S to OQ 
by T, we observe that 

OP^OQ’^ {OT - PTKOT + PT) = OP’ - PT* 

= (or* + ST*) - (PT* + ST*) 

-<•-«*. 





LINKAGES 


167 


The quantity is a constant which we call r*. Since OP»OQ = r*, 
P and Q are inverse points with respect to a circle with radius r and 
center 0. As P describes its circular path (which passes through 0), 
Q describes the curve inverse to the circle. This curve must be a 
straight line, for we have proved that the inverse of a circle passing 
through 0 is a straight line. Thus the path of Q is a straight line, 
drawn without using a straightedge. 

Another linkage that solves the same problem is Hart's inversor. 
This consists of five rods connected as in Figure 59. Here AB = CD, 



BC = AD. 0, P and Q are points fixed on the rods AB, AD, CB, 
respectively, such that AOfOB — AP/PD = CQ/QB = m/n. Points 
0 and S are fixed in the plane so that OS = PS, while the rest of the 
linkage is free to move. Evidently, AC is always parallel to BD. 
Hence, 0, P and Q are collinear, and OP is parallel to AC. Draw AE 
and CF perpendicular to BD. We have 

AC^BD = EF.BD = {ED + EB){ED - EB) = Elf - EB*. 

But ED'^ + AE^ = AD\ and EB^ + AE^ = AB\ Hence ED* - EB* = 
Alf - AB*. Now 

OPIBD = AOlAB = ml{m + n) and OQ/AC = 0B/AB = n/{m + n). 
Thus 

OP-OQ = [mn/{m + n)*]BD.AC = [mn/(tn + n)*](AZ)* - AB*). 

This quantity is the same for all possible positions of the linkage. 
Therefore P and Q are inverse points with respect to some circle about 0. 
When the linkage is moved, P describes a circle about S which passes 
through 0, while its inverse Q describes a straight line. 








158 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[III] 


Other linkages can be constructed (at least in principle) which will 
draw ellipses, hyperbolas, and indeed any curve given by an algebraic 
equation f(Xy y) = 0 of any degree. 

§6. MORE ABOUT INVERSION AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
1. Invariance of Angles. Families of Circles 

Although inversion in a circle greatly changes the appearance of geo¬ 
metrical figures, it is a remarkable fact that the new figures continue 
to possess many of the properties of the old. These are the properties 
which are unchanged, ^finvariant,'' under the transformation. As 
we already know, inversion transforms circles and straight lines into 
circles and straight lines. We now add another important property: 
The angle between two lines or curves is invariant under inversion. By 
this we mean that any two intersecting curves are transformed by an 
inversion into two other curves which still intersect at the same angle. 
By the angle between two curves we mean, of course, the angle between 
their tangents. 

The proof may be understood from Figure 60, which illustrates the 
special case of a curve C intersecting a straight line OL at a point P. 
The inverse C' of C meets OL in the inverse point P', which, since OL 



Fif. 60. Inyariano* of anglei under inyereion. 


INVARIANCE OF ANGLES 


159 


is its own inverse, lies on OL. We shall show that the angle Xt between 
OL and the tangent to C at P is equal in magnitude to the corresponding 
angle j/o. To do this we choose a point A on the curve C near P, and 
draw the secant AP. The inverse of is a point A' which, being on 
both the line OA and the curve C", must be at their intersection. We 
draw the secant A'P'. By the definition of inversion, 

/ = OP.OP' = OA.OA\ 
or 

OP ^0^ 

OA OP'’ 

i.e. the triangles OAP and OA'P' are similar. Hence angle x is equal 
to angle OA'P', which we call y. Our final step consists in letting the 
point A move along C and approach the point P. This causes the 
secant line AP to revolve into the position of the tangent line to C at P, 
while the angle x tends to xo. At the same time A' will approach P', 
and A 'P' will revolve into the tangent at P'. The angle y approaches yo. 
Since x is equal to y at every position of A, we must have in the limit, 
x# = yo. 

Our proof is only partially completed, however, since we have con¬ 
sidered only the <!ase of a curve intersecting a line through 0. The 
general case of two curves C, C* forming an angle s at P is now easily 
disposed of. For it is evident that the line OPP' divides z into two 
angles, each of which we know to be preserved by the inversion. 

It should be noted that although inversion preserves the magnitude of angles, 
it reverses their tense; i.e. if a ray through P sweeps out the angle x* in a counter¬ 
clockwise direction, its image will sweep out angle y% in a clockwise direction. 

A particular consequence of the invariance of angle under inversion is 
that two circles or lines that are orthogonal, i.e. that intersect at right 
angles, remain orthogonal after an inversion, while two circles which 
are tangent, i.e. intersect at the angle zero, remain tangent. 

Let us consider the family of all circles that pass through the center 
of inversion 0 and through another fixed point A of the plane. From §4, 
Article 2, we know that this family of circles is transformed into a family 
of straight lines that radiate from A', the image of A. The family of 
circles orthogonal to the original family goes over into circles orthogonal 
to the lines through A', as shown in Figure 61. (The orthogonal cir¬ 
cles are shown by broken lines.) The simple picture of the radiating 



160 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[III] 


straight lines appears to be quite different from that of the circles, yet 
we see that they are closely related—indeed from the standpoint of 
the theory of inversion they are entirely equivalent. 



I 


Fig. 61. Two •ystama of orthogonal oiroles related by inversion. 

Another example of the effect of inversion is given by a family of 
circles tangent to each other at the center of inversion. After the trans¬ 
formation they become a system of parallel lines. For the images of 
the circles are straight lines, and no two of these lines intersect, since the 
original circles meet only at 0. 



0 

Fig. 62. Tangant diolsa tranafonned into parallel lines. 




APPLICATION TO PROBLEM OF APOLLONIUS 


161 


2. Application to the Problem of Apollonius 

A good illustration of the usefulness of the theory of inversion is the 
following simple geometrical solution of the problem of Apollonius. By 
inversion with respect to any center, the Apollonius problem for three 
given circles can be transformed into the corresponding problem for 
three other circles (why is this?). Hence, if we can solve the problem 
for any one triple of circles, then it is solved for any other triple of 
circles obtained from the first by inversion. We shall exploit this fact 
by selecting among all these equivalent triples of circles one for which 
the problem is almost trivially simple. 

We start with three circles having centers A, B, C, and we shall 
suppose the required circle U with center 0 and radius p to be exter¬ 
nally tangent to the three given circles. If we increase the radii of 
the three given circles by the same quantity d, then the circle with the 
same center 0 and the radius p — d will obviously solve the new problem. 



By way of preparation we make use of this fact in order to replace the 
three given circles by three others such that two of them are tangent 
to each other at a point K (Fig. 63). Next we invert the whole figure 
in some circle with center K, The circles around B and C become 
parallel lines b and c, while the third circle becomes another circle a 
(Fig. 64). We know that a, b, c can all be constructed by ruler and 
compass. The unknown circle is transformed into a circle u which 
touches a, 6, c. Its radius r is evidently half the distance between b 
and c. Its center O' is one of the two intersections of the line midway 
between b and c with the circle about A' (the center of a) having the 



162 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


[III I 


radius r + s (s being the radius of a). Finally, by constructing the 
circle inverse to w we find the center of the desired Apollonius circle U. 
(Its center, 0, will be the inverse in the circle of inversion of the point 
inverse to K in u.) 


h 



*3. Repeated Reflections 

Everyone is familiar with the strange reflection phenomena that occur 
when more than one mirror is used. If the four walls of a rectangular 
room were covered with ideal non-absorbing mirrors, a lighted point 
would have infinitely many images, one corresponding to each congruent 
room obtained by reflection (Fig. 65). A less regular constellation of 


1 

* i ^ 

\ 

\ 


* 

1 

* I ^ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

* 


1 

1 

t 

1 

1 

* j * 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

* 1 

1 

1 

1 

1 * 

1 

L 

1 

* j -x- 

1 

1 

1 

* i 

1 

1 

r 

1 

! * 

1 

1 


Fig. 66. Repeated reflection in rectangular walls. 


mirrors, e.g. three mirrors, gives a much more complicated series of 
images. The resulting configuration can be described easily only when 












REPEATED REFLECTIONS 


163 


the reflected triangles form a non-overlapping covering of the plane. 
This occurs only for the case of the rectangular isosceles triangle, the 
equilateral triangle, and the rectangular half of the latter; see Figure 
66 . 




The situation becomes much more interesting if we consider repeated 
inversion in a pair of circles. Standing between two concentric circular 
mirrors one would see an infinite number of other circles concentric with 
them. One sequence of these circles tends to infinity, while the other 
concentrates around the center. The case of two external circles is a 



Fig. 07. Repeated reflection in eyetema of two cirolee. 






164 


GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


mil 



Fig. Rafleotion in n tystem of three oirolee. 


little more complicated. Here the circles and their images reflect sue- 
cessively into one another, growing smaller with each reflection, until 
they narrow down to two points, one in each circle. (These points have 
the property of being mutually inverse with respect to both circles.) 
The situation is shown in Figure 67. The use of three circles leads to 
the beautiful pattern shown in Figure 68. 




CHAPTER IV 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS. NON-EUCLIDEAN 

GEOMETRIES 

§1. INTRODUCTION 

1. Classification of Geometrical Properties. Invariance under 
Transformations 

Geometry deals with the properties of figures in the plane or in space. 
These properties are so numerous and so varied that some principle of 
classification is necessary to bring order into this wealth of knowledge. 
One might, for example, introduce a classification based on the method 
Uvsed in deriving the theorems. From this point of view a distinction 
is usually made between the “synthetic^' and the ‘‘analytic^^ procedures. 
The first of these is the classical axiomatic method of Euclid, in which 
the subject is built upon purely geometrical foundations independent of 
algebra and the concept of the number continuum, and in which the 
theorems are deduced by logical reasoning from an initial body of 
statements called axioms or postulates. The second method is based 
on the introduction of numerical coordinates, and uses the technique 
of algebra. This method has brought about a profound change in 
mathematical science, resulting in a unification of geometry, analysis 
and algebra into one organic system. 

In this chapter a classification according to method will be less im 
portant than a classification according to contenty based on the char¬ 
acter of the theorems themselves, irrespective of the methods used to 
prove them. In elementary plane geometry one distinguishes between 
theorems dealing with the congruence of figures, using the concepts of 
length and angle, and theorems dealing with the similarity of figures, 
using the concept of angle only. This particular distinction is not very 
important, since length and angle are so closely connected that it is 
rather artificial to separate them. (It is the study of this connection 
which makes up most of the subject of trigonometry.) Instead, we may 
say that the theorems of elementary geometry concern magnitudes — 
lengths, measures of angles, and areas. Two figures are equivalent from 

166 



166 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIV) 


this point of view if they are congruent, that is, if one can be obtained 
from the other by a rigid motion, in which merely position but no mag¬ 
nitude is changed. The question now arises whether the concept of 
magnitude and the related concepts of congruence and similarity are 
essential to geometry, or whether geometrical figures may have even 
deeper properties that are not destroyed by transformations more 
drastic than the rigid motions. We shall see that this is indeed the case. 

Suppose we draw a circle and a pair of its perpendicular diameters on 
a rectangular block of soft wood, as in Figure 69. If we place this 




Fig. 09. CompreeaioD of a circle. 

block between the jaws of a powerful vise and compress it to half its 
original width, the circle will become an ellipse and the angles between 
the diameters of the ellipse will no longer be right angles. The circle 
has the property that its points are equidistant from the center, while 
this does not hold true of the ellipse. Thus it might seem that all the 
geometrical properties of the original configuration are destroyed by 
the compression. But this is far from being the case; for example, the 
statement that the center bisects each diameter is true of both the 
circle and the ellipse. Here we have a property which persists even 
after a rather drastic change in the magnitudes of the original figure. 
This observation suggests the possibility of classifying theorems about a 
geometrical figure according to whether they remain true or become false 
when the figure is subjected to a uniform compression. More generally, 
given any definite class of transformations of a figure (such as the class 
of all rigid motions, compressions, inversion in circles, etc.), we may ask 
what properties of the figure will be unchanged under this class of 
transformations. The body of theorems dealing with these properties 
will be the geometry associated with this doss of tran^ormations. The 





CLASSIFICATION OF GEOMETRICAL PROPERTIES 


167 


idea of classifying the different branches of geometry according to the 
classes of transformations considered was proposed by Felix Klein 
(1849-1925) in a famous address (the ‘^Erlanger program’^ given in 
1872. Since that time it has greatly influenced geometrical thinking. 

In Chapter V we shall discover the very surprising fact that certain 
properties of geometrical figures are so deeply inherent that they persist 
even after the figures are subjected to quite arbitrary deformations; 
figures drawn on a piece of rubber which is stretched or compressed in 
any manner still preserve some of their original characteristics. In this 
chapter, however, we shall be concerned with those properties which 
remain unchanged, or ^^nvariant,'' under a special class of transforma¬ 
tions which lies between the very restricted class of rigid motions on the 
one hand, and the most general class of arbitrary deformations on the 
other. This is the class of '^projective transformations.'^ 

2. Projective Transformations 

The study of these geometrical properties was forced upon mathema¬ 
ticians long ago by the problems of perspective^ which were studied by 
artists such as Leonardo da Vinci and Albrecht Diirer. The image made 
by a painter can be regarded as a projection of the original onto the 
canvas, with the center of projection at the eye of the painter. In this 
process lengths and angles are necessarily distorted, in a way that 
depends on the relative positions of the various objects depicted. Still, 
the geometrical structure of the original can usually be recognized on 
the canvas. How is this possible? It must be because there exist 
geometrical properties "invariant under projection"—properties which 
appear unchanged in the image and make the identification possible. 
To find and analyze these properties is the object of projective geometry. 

It is clear that the theorems in this branch of geometry cannot be 
statements about lengths and angles or about congruence. Some iso¬ 
lated facts of a projective nature have been known since the seventeenth 
century and even, as in the case of the "theorem of Menelaus," since 
antiquity. But a systematic study of projective geometry was first 
made at the end of the eighteenth century, when the Ecole Poly¬ 
technique in Paris initiated a new period in mathematical progress, 
particularly in geometry. This school, a product of the French Revolu¬ 
tion, produced many officers for the military services of the Republic. 
One of its graduates was J. V. Poncelet (1788-1867), who wrote his fam¬ 
ous TraM des propriiUs projectives des figures in 1813, while a prisoner 
of war in Russia. In the nineteenth century, under the influence of 



168 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVi 


Steiner, von Staudt, Chosles, and others, projective geometry became 
one of the chief subjects of mathematical research. Its popularity was 
due partly to its great aesthetic charm and partly to its clarifying effect 
on geometry as a whole and its intimate connection with non-Euclidean 
geometry and algebra. 

§2. FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS 
1. The Group of Projective Transformations 

We first define the class, or ^^group,^’t of projective transformations. 
Suppose we have two planes tt and ir' in space, not necessarily parallel 
to each other. We may then perform a central projection of tt onto tt' 
from a given center 0 not lying in t or tt' by defining the image of each 
point P of IT to be that point P' of ir', such that P and P' lie on the same 
straight line through 0. We may also perform a parallel projection, 
where the projecting lines are all parallel. In the same way, we can 
define the projection of a line Hn a plane tt onto another line V inir 
from a point 0 in t or by a parallel projection. 


0 



t The term ‘'group/' when applied to a class of transformations, implies that 
the successive application of two transformations of the class results again in a 
transformation of the same class, and that the ‘‘inverse" of a transformation of 
the class again belongs to the class. Group properties of mathematical operations 
have played and are playing a very great rdle in many fields, although in geometry, 
perhaps, the importance of the group concept has been a little exaggerated. 



GROUP OF PROJECTIVE TRANSFORMATIONS 


169 


Any mapping of one figure onto another by a central or parallel pro¬ 
jection, or by a finite succession of such projections, is called a projec¬ 
tive transformation,] The projective geometry of the plane or of the line 
consists of the body of those geometrical propositions which are un¬ 
affected by arbitrary projective transformations of the figures to which 
they refer. In contrast, we shall call metric geometry the body of those 
propositions dealing with the magnitudes of figures, invariant only under 
the class of rigid motions. 



Some projective properties can be recognized immediately. A point, 
of course, projects into a point. Moreover, a straight line is projected 
into a straight line] for, if the line Hn tt is projected onto the plane tt', 
the intersection of tt' with the plane through 0 and I will be the straight 
line VX If a point A and a straight line I are incident,!! then after any 
projection the corresponding point A' and line V will again be incident. 

! Two figures related by a single projection are commonly said to be in perspec¬ 
tive. Thus a figure F is related by a projective transformation to a figure F* if 
F and F' are in perspective, or if we can find a succession of figures, 
F, Fi , F 2 , • • • , Fn , F', such that each figure is in perspective with the following 
one. 

t There are exceptions if the line OP (or if the plane through O and f) is parallel 
to the plane ir\ These exceptioifs will be removed in §4. 

!! A point and a line are called incident if the line goes through the point, or 
the point is on the line. The neutral word leaves it open whether the line or the 
point is considered more important 



170 PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATIC8 [IVJ 

Thus the incidence of a point and a line is invariant under the projective 
group. From this fact many simple but important consequences follow. 
If three or more points are coUinear, i.e. incident with some straight line, 
then their images will also be collinear. Likewise, if in the plane re 
three or more straight lines are concurrent, i.e. incident with some point, 
then their images will also be concurrent straight lines. While these 
simple properties—incidence, collinearity, and concurrence—are projec¬ 
tive properties (i.e. properties invariant under projections), measures of 
length and angle, and ratios of such magnitudes, are generally altered 
by projection. Isosceles or equilateral triangles may project into 
triangles all of whose sides have different lengths. Hence, although 
“triangle” is a concept of projective geometry, “equilateral triangle” 
is not, and belongs to metric geometry only. 

2. Desargues’s Theorem 

One of the earliest discoveries of projective geometry was the famous 
triangle theorem of Desargues (1593-1662): If in a plane two triangles 
ABC and A'B'C' are situated so that the straight lines joining correspond¬ 
ing vertices are concurrent in a point 0, then the corresponding sides, if 
extended, will intersect in three coUinear points. Figure 72 illustrates 

C 


0 


Q R P 

Fig. 72. Desarguee^ configuration in the plane. 

the theorem, and the reader should draw other figures to test it by 
experiment. The proof is not trivial, in spite of the simplicity of the 
figure, which involves only straight lines. The theorem clearly be¬ 
longs to projective geometry, for if we project the whole figure onto 
another plane, it will retain all the properties involved in the theorem. 



DESARGUES*S THEOREM 


171 


We shall return to this theorem on page 187. At the moment we wish 
to call attention to the remarkable fact that Desargues^s theorem is also 
true if the two triangles lie in two different (non-parallel) planes, and 
that this Desargues’s theorem of three-dimensional geometry is very 
easily proved. Suppose that the lines AA', SB', and CC' intersect at 
0 (Fig. 73), according to hypothesis. Then AB lies in the same plane 


0 



as A'B', so that these two lines intersect at some point Q; likewise AC 
and A'C' intersect in B, and BC and B'C' intersect in P, Since P, Q, 
and R are on extensions of the sides of ABC and A^B'C\ they lie in the 
same plane with each of these two triangles, and must consequently 
lie on the line of intersection of these two planes. Therefore P, Q, 
and R are collinear, as was to be proved. 

This simple proof suggests that we might prove the theorem for two 
dimensions by, so to speak, a passage to the limit, letting the whole 
figure flatten out so that the two planes coincide in the limit and the 
point 0, together with all the othei’s, falls into this plane. There is, 
however, a certain difficulty in carrying out such a limiting process, 
because the line of intersection PQR is not uniquely determined when 



172 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIVJ 


the planes coincide. However, the configuration of Figure 72 may be 
regarded as a perspective drawing of the space configuration of Figure 
73, and this fact can be used to prove the theorem in the plane case. 

There is actually a fundamental difference between Desargues's theorem in the 
plane and in space. Our proof in three dimensions used geometrical reasoning 
based solely on the concepts of incidence and intersection of points, lines, and 
planes. It can be shown that the proof of the two-dimensional theorem, provided 
it is to proceed entirely in the plane^ necessarily requires the use of the concept of 
similarity of figures, which is based upon the metric concept of length and is no 
longer a projective notion. 

The converse of Desargues’s theorem states that if ABC and A^B'C* are two 
triangles situated so that the points where corresponding sides intersect are col- 
linear, then the lines joining corresponding vertices are concurrent. Its proof 
for the case where the two triangles are in two non-parallel planes is left to the 
reader as an exercise. 


§3. CROSS-RATIO 

1. Definition and Proof of Invariance 

Just as the length of a line segment is the key to metric geometry, so 
there is one fundamental concept of projective geometry in terms of 
which all distinctively projective properties of figures can be expressed. 

If three points A, B, C lie on a straight line, a projection will in 
general change not only the distances AB and BC but also the ratio 
ABIBC. In fact, any three points A, R, C on a straight line I can 
always be coordinated with any three points A', J5', C' on another line 
V by two successive projections. To do this, we may rotate the line V 
about the point C' until it assumes a position V' parallel to I (see Fig. 
74). We then project I onto 1" by a projection parallel to the line 
joining C and C', defining three points, A", R", and C" (= C'). The 



Fig. 74. 


0 



DEFINITION AND PROOF OF INVARIANCE 


173 


lines joining A', A" and B', B" will intersect in a point 0, which we 
choose as the center of a second projection. These two projections 
accomplish the desired result.f 

As we have just seen, no quantity that involves only three points on 
a line can be invariant under projection. But—and this is the decisive 
discovery of projective geometry—if we have four points A, B, C, D 
on a straight line, and project these into A', B', C', D' on another line, 
then there is a certain quantity, called the cross-ratio of the four points, 
that retains its value under the projection. Here is a mathematical 
property of a set of four points on a line that is not destroyed by projec¬ 
tion and that can be recognized in any image of the line. The cross- 
ratio is neither a length, nor the ratio of two lengths, but the ratio of 
two such ratios: if we consider the ratios CAfCB and DAIDB, then 
their ratio, 


-I- 

A 


H- 

B 


-I-1- 

C D 


CA /DA 
* CB/ DB' 

is by definition the crosS-ratio of the four points A, B, C, D, taken in 
that order. 

We now show that the cross-ratio of four points is invariant under 
'projection^ i.e. that if A, B, C, D and A', B', C', D' are corresponding 
points on two lines related by a projection, then 

CA /DA ^ /D'A' 

CB/ DB C'BW D'B'' 

The proof follows by elementary means. We recall that the area of a 
triangle is equal to ^base X altitude) and is also given by half the 
product of any two sides by the sine of the included angle. We then 
have, in Figure 75, 

area OCA = JA-CA = iOA-OC sin Z COA 
area OCB = ih^CB = \OB*OC sin Z COB 
arcaODA = \h*DA = JOA*ODsin Z DO A 
area ODB = \h-DB = \OB^OD sin Z DOB, 


I What if the lines joining A', A" and B” are parallel? 



174 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


(IVl 


It follows that 

CA /DA _CA DB _ OA-OC-sin Z COA OB-OD-sm Z DOB 
CBl DB CB’dA OB.OC.sin Z COBOA-OD^Rm Z DOA 

_ sin Z COA sin Z DOB 
sin Z COB sin Z DOA 


O 



Fig. 76. Invariance of orooS'ratio under central projection. 

Hence the cross-ratio of ^4, B, C, Z> depends only on the angles sub¬ 
tended at 0 by the segments joining B, C, D. Since these angles 
are the same for any four points A', B', C', B' into which A, C, D 
may be projected from 0, it follows that the cross-ratio remains un¬ 
changed by projection. 

That the cross-ratio of four points remains unchanged by a parallel projection 
follows from elementary properties of similar triangles. The proof is left to the 
reader as an exercise. 





DEFINITION AND PROOF OF INVARIANCE 


175 


So far we have understood the cross-ratio of four points -A, B, C, D 
on a line Z to be a ratio involving positive lengths. It is more con¬ 
venient to modify this definition as follows. We choose one direction on Z 
as positive, and agree that lengths measured in this direction shall be 
positive, while lengths measured in the opposite direction shall be nega¬ 
tive. We then define the cross-ratio of il, B, C, D in that order as the 
quantity 

(1) (abco)=“/^, 

where the numbers CA, CB, DA, DB are understood to be taken with 
the proper sign. Since a reversal of the chosen positive direction on Z 
will merely change the sign of every term of this ratio, the value of 
{A BCD) will not depend on the direction chosen. It is easily seen that 
(A BCD) will be negative or positive according as the pair of points 
A, B is or is not separated (i.e. interlocked) by the pair C, D. Since 
this separation property is invariant under projection, the signed cross¬ 
ratio (A BCD) is invariant also. If we select a fixed point 0 on Z as 

{ABCD)>0 

A B C D ^ 

{ABCDXO 

1 — 0- 0^ O 

A C B D 

Fig. 77. Sign of croaa'ratio 

origin and choose as the coordinate x of each point on Z its directed dis¬ 
tance from 0, so that the coordinates of A, B, C, D are a:i, X 2 , 0 : 3 , xi, 
respectively, then 

UBCD) - 54 /^ . ’1^ 

CB / DB x% — Xi I Xi — Xi Xi — Xi Xi — Xi 

When {ABCD) = - 1 , so that CA/CB = -DAjDB, then C and D 
0 ABC D 



Fig. 78. CroOT-ratio in tanns of oo6rdinat«a. 


176 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIVl 


divide the segment AB internally and externally in the same ratio. 
In this case, C and D are said to divide the segment AB harmonically, 
and each of the points C,Di3 called the harmonic conjugate of the other 
with respect to the pair A, B. If (ABCD) = 1, then the points C and D 
(or A and B) coincide. 

It should be kept in mind that the order in which A, B, C, D are 
taken is an essential part of the definition of the cross-ratio {ABCD). 
For example, if {ABCD) — X, then the cross-ratio {BACD) is 1/X, while 
{ACBD) = 1 — X, as the reader may easily verify. Four points A, B, 
C, D can be ordered in 4 ■ 3 * 2 ■ 1 =24 different ways, each of which gives 
a certain value to their cross-ratio. Some of these permutations will 
3 deld the same value for the cross-ratio as the original arrangement 
A, B, C, D; e.g. {ABCD) = {BADC). It is left as an exercise for the 
reader to show that there are only six different values of the cross-ratio 
for these 24 different permutations of the points, namely 



These six quantities are in general distinct, but two of them may coin¬ 
cide—as in the case of harmonic division; when X = —1. 

We may also define the cross-ratio of four coplanar (i.e. lying in a 
common plane) and concurrent straight lines 1, 2, 3, 4 as the cross-ratio 
of the four points of intersection of these lines with another straight 
line lying in the same plane. The position of this fifth line is imma¬ 
terial because of the invariance of the cross-ratio under projection. 
Equivalent to this is the definition 


(1234) 


sin (1, 3) / sin (1, 4) 
sin (2, 3)/ sin (2,4)’ 


taken with a plus or minus sign according as one pair of lines does not 
or does separate the other. (In this formxila, (1, 3), for example, means 
the angle between the lines 1 and 3.) Finally, we may define the cross¬ 
ratio of four coaxial planes (four planes in space intersecting in a line I, 
their axis). If a straight line intersects the planes in four points, these 
points will always have the same cross-ratio, whatever the position of 
the line may be. (The proof of this fact is left as an exercise.) Hence 
we may assign this value as the cross-ratio of the four planes. Equiva¬ 
lently, we may define the cross-ratio of four coaxial plwes as the cross- 
ratio of the four lines in which they are intersected by any fifth plane 
(see Fig. 79). 



DEFINITION AND PROOF OF INVARIANCE 


177 


The concept of the cross-ratio of four planes leads naturally to the 
question of whether a projective transformation of three-dimensional 
space into itself can be defined. The definition by central projection 



cannot immediately be generalized from two to three dimensions. But 
it can be proved that every continuous transformation of a plane into 
itself that correlates in a biunique manner points with points and lines 
with lines is a projective transformation. This theorem suggests the 
following definition for three dimensions: A projective transformation 
of space is a continuous biunique transformation that preserves 
straight lines. It can be shown that these transformations leave the 
cross-ratio invariant. 

The preceding statements may be supplemented by a few remarks. 
Suppose we have three distinct points, A, B, C, on a line, with coordi¬ 
nates XifX%,xz. Required, to find a fourth point D so that the cross- 
ratio (ABCD) = X, where X is prescribed. (The special case X = — 1, 
for which the problem amounts to the construction of the fourth har¬ 
monic point, will be taken up in more detail in the next article.) In 



178 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IV] 


general, the problem has one and only one solution; for, if x is the coordi¬ 
nate of the desired point D, then the equation 

( 2 ) ^ ^ 

X8 — X2 a? — iCl 

has exactly one solution x. If xi,X 2 , Xs are given, and if we abbreviate 
equation (2) by setting (xs — Xi)/(X8 — Xi) = k, we find on solving this 
equation that x = (kx 2 — \xi)/(k — X). For example, if the three 
points Aj By C are equidistant, with coordinates Xi = 0, Xj = d, Xs = 2d 
respectively; then A; = (2d — 0)/(2d — d) = 2, and x = 2d/(2 — X). 

If we project the same line I onto two different lines V, Z" from two 
different centers O' and 0", we obtain a correspondence P' between 
the points of Z and Z', and a correspondence P P" between those of 
Z and Z". This sets up a correspondence P' P" between the points of V 



Fif. 80. Projective correepondenoe between the points on two lines. 


and those of Z" which has the property that every set of four points A', P', 
C', D' on V has the same cross-ratio as the corresponding set A", P", 
C", P" on Z". Any biunique correspondence between the points on two 
lines which has this property is called a projective correspondencey irre¬ 
spective of how the correspondence is defined. 


DEFINITION AND PROOF OF INVARIANCE 


179 


EzerciBea: 1) Prove that, given two lines together with a projective cor¬ 
respondence between their points, one can shift one line by a parallel displace¬ 
ment into such a position that the given correspondence is obtained by a simple 
projection. (Hint: Bring a pair of corresponding points of the two lines into 
coincidence.) 

2) On the basis of the preceding result, show that if the points of two lines 
I and V are coordinated by any finite succession of projections onto various inter¬ 
mediate lines, using arbitrary centers of projection, the same result can be ob¬ 
tained by only two projections. 

2. Application to the Complete Quadrilateral 

As an interesting application of the invariance of the cross-ratio we 
shall establish a simple but important theorem of projective geometry. 
It concerns the complete quadrilateral^ a figure consisting of any four 
straight lines, no three of which are concurrent, and of the six points 
where they intersect. In Figure 81 the four lines are AE, BE, BI, AF. 
The lines through AB, EG, and IF are the diagonals of the quadrilateral. 
Take any diagonal, say AB, and mark on it the points C and D where 
it meets the other two diagonals. We then have the theorem: 
{ABCD) = —1; in words, the points of intersection of one diagonal with 
the other two separate the vertices on that diagonal harmonically. To provf 
this we simply observe that 


E 



Fig. 81. Complete quadrilateral. 


* = {ABCD) = (IFHD) by projection from E, 
(IFHD) = (BACD) by projection from G. 



180 PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS [ IV ) 

But we know that (BACD) = 1/(ABCD); so that x = l/x, x* = 1, 
X = dbl. Since C, D separate A, B, the cross-ratio x is negative and 
must therefore be — 1, which was to be proved. 

This remarkable property of the complete quadrilateral enables us to 
find with the straightedge alone the harmonic conjugate with respect 
to A, B of any third collinear point C. We need only choose a point E 
off the line, draw BA, BB, EC, mark a point G on EC, draw AG and 
BO intersecting BB and BA at F and I respectively, and draw IF, which 
intersects the line of A, B, C in the required fourth harmonic point D. 

Problem: Given a segment AB in the plane and a region R, as shown in Figure 
82. It is desired to continue the line AR to the right of R. How may this be 
done with straightedge alone so that the straightedge never crosses R during the 
construction? (Hint: Choose two arbitrary points C, C' on the segment AB, 
then locate their harmonic conjugates D, D' respectively by means of four quad¬ 
rilaterals having A, B m vertices.) 


A B 

Fig. 83. Producing • line beyond an obstacle. 

§4. PARALLELISM AND INFINITY 

1. Points at Infinity as 'Tdeal Points” 

An examination of the previous section will disclose that some of 
our arguments fail if certain lines in the constructions, supposed to be 
produced until they intersect, are in fact parallel. For example, in the 
construction above the fourth harmonic point D fails to exist if the line 
IF is parallel to AB. Geometrical reasoning seems to be hampered at 
every step by the fact that two parallel lines do not intersect, so that in 
any discussion involving the intersection of lines the exceptional case of 
parallel lines has to be considered, and formulated separately. Likewise, 
projection from a center 0 has to be distinguished from parallel pro¬ 
jection, which requires separate treatment. If we really had to go 
into a detailed discussion of every such exceptional case, projective 
geometry would become very complicated. We are therefore led to 
try an alternative—namely, to find extensions of our basic concepts that 
will eliminate the exceptions. 

Here geometrical intuition points the way: if a straight line that inter¬ 
sects another is rotated slowly towards a parallel position, then the point 
of intersection of the two lines will recede to infinity. We might naively 



POINTS AT INFINITY AS "IDEAL POINTS” 


181 


say that the two lines intersect at a “point at infinity/^ The essential 
thing is then to give this vague statement a precise meaning, so that 
points at infinity, or, as they are sometimes called, ideal points, can be 
dealt with exactly as though they were ordinary points in the plane or 
in space. In other words, we want all rules concerning the behavior of 
points, lines, planes, etc. to persist, even when these geometric elements 
are ideal. To achieve this goal we can proceed either intuitively or 
formally, just as we did in extending the number system, where one 
approach was from the intuitive idea of measuring, and another from 
the formal rules of arithmetical operations. 

First, let us realize that in synthetic geometry even the basic concepts of 
“ordinary’' point and line are not mathematically defined. The so-called 
definitions of these concepts which are frequently found in textbooks on 
elementary geometry are only suggestive descriptions. In the case of 
ordinary geometrical elements our intuition makes us feel at ease 
as far as their “existence” is concerned. But all we really need in 
geometry, considered as a mathematical system, is the validity of certain 
rules by means of which we can operate with these concepts, as in 
joining points, finding the intersection of lines, etc. Logically con¬ 
sidered, a “point” is not a “thing in itself,” but is completely described 
by the totality of statements by which it is related to other objects. 
The mathematical existence of “points at infinity” will be assured as soon 
as we have stated in a clear and consistent manner the mathematical 
properties of these new entities, i.e. their relations to “ordinary” points 
and to each other. The ordinary axioms of geometry (e.g, Euclid's) 
are abstractions from the physical world of pencil and chalk marks, 
stretched strings, light rays, rigid rods, etc. The properties which these 
axioms attribute to mathematical points and lines are highly simplified 
and idealized descriptions of the behavior of their physical counterparts. 
Through any two actual pencil dots not one but many pencil lines can 
be drawn. If the dots become smaller and smaller in diameter then all 
these lines will have approximately the same appearance. This is what 
we have in mind when we state as an axiom of geometry that “through 
any two points one and only one straight line may be drawn”; we are 
referring not to physical points and lines but to the abstract and con¬ 
ceptual points and lines of geometry. Geometrical points and lines 
have essentially simpler properties than do any physical objects, and 
this simplification provides the essential condition for the development 
of geometry as a deductive science. 

As we have noticed, the ordinary geometry of points and lines is 



182 PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS (IV ] 

greatly complicated by the fact that a pair of parallel lines do not inter¬ 
sect in a point. We are therefore led to make a further simplification 
in the structure of geometry by enlarging the concept of geometrical 
point in order to remove this exception, just as we enlarged the concept 
of number in order to remove the restrictions on subtraction and divi¬ 
sion. Here also we shall be guided throughout by the desire to preserve 
in the extended domain the laws which governed the original domain. 

We shxill therefore agree to add to the ordinary points on each line a 
single ^*ideal” point This point shall be considered to belong to all the 
lines parallel to the given line and to no other lines. As a consequence of 
this convention every pair of lines in the plane will now intersect in a 
single point; if the lines are not parallel they will intersect in an ordinary 
point, while if the lines are parallel they will intersect in the ideal point 
common to the two lines. For intuitive reasons the ideal point on a 
line is called the point at infinity on the line. 

The intuitive concept of a point on a line receding to infinity might suggest 
that we add two ideal points to each line, one for each direction along the line. 
The reason for adding only one, as we have done, is that we wish to preserve the 
law that through any two points one and only one line may be drawn. If a line 
contained two points at infinity in common with every parallel line then through 
these two ^^points’^ infinitely many parallel lines would pass. 

Wc shall also agree to add to the ordinary lines in a plane a single ^HdeaV^ 
line (also called the line at infinity in the plane), containing all the ideal 
points in the plane and no other points. Precisely this convention is 
forced upon us if we wish to preserve the original law that through 
every two points one line may be drawn, and the newly gained law that 
every two lines intersect in a point. To see this, let us choose any two 
ideal points. Then the unfque line which is required to pass through 
these points cannot be an ordinary line, since by our agreement any 
ordinary line contains but one ideal point. Moreover, this line cannot 
contain any ordinary points, since an ordinary point and one ideal point 
determine an ordinary line. Finally, this line must contain all the 
ideal points, since we wish it to have a point in common with every 
ordinary line. Hence this line must have precisely the properties which 
we have assigned to the ideal line in the plane. 

According to our conventions, a point at infinity is determined or is 
represented by any family of parallel lines, just as an irrational number is 
determined by a sequence of nested rational intervals. The statement 
that the intersection of two parallel lines is a point at infinity has no 
mysterious connotation, but is only a convenient way of stating that the 
lines are parallel. This way of expressing parallelism, in the language 



POINTS AT INFINITY AS ‘‘IDEAL POINTS'' 


183 


originally reserved for intuitively different objects, has the sole purpose 
of making the enumeration of exceptional cases superfluous; they are 
now automatically covered by the same kind of linguistic expressions or 
other symbols that are used for the ‘‘ordinary^' cases. 

To sum up: our conventions regarding points at infinity have been so 
chosen that the laws governing the incidence relation between ordinary 
points and lines continue to hold in the extended domain of points, 
while the operation of finding the point of intersection of two lines, 
previously possible only if the lines are not parallel, may now be per¬ 
formed without restriction. The considerations which led to this formal 
simplification in the properties of the incidence relation may seem some¬ 
what abstract. But they are amply justified by the result, as the reader 
will see in the following pages. 

2. Ideal Elements and Projection 

The introduction of the points at infinity and the line at infinity in a 
plane enables us to treat the projection of one plane onto another in a 
much more satisfactory way. Let us consider the projection of a plane 
V onto a plane tt' from a center 0 (Fig. 83). This projection estab¬ 



lishes a correspondence between the points and lines of tt and those of t'. 
To every point A of ir corresponds a unique point A' of tt', with the 
following exceptions: if the projecting ray through 0 is parallel to the 




184 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVl 


plane then it intersects t in a point A to which no ordinary point 
of *•' corresponds. These exceptional points of x lie on a line I to which 
no ordinary line of x' corresponds. But these exceptions are eliminated 
if we make the agreement that to A corresponds the point at infinity 
in x' in the direction of the line OA, and that to I corresponds the line 
at infinity in r'. In the same way, we assign a point at infinity in x 
to any point B' on the line m' in x' through which pass all the rays 
from 0 parallel to the plane x. To m' itself will correspond the line 
at infinity in x. Thus, by the introduction of the points and line at 
infinity in a plane, a projection of one plane onto another eetablishes a 
correspondence between the points and lines of the two planes which is 
biunique without exception. (This disposes of the exceptions mentioned 
in the footnote on p. 169.) Moreover, it is easily seen to be a conse¬ 
quence of our agreement that a point lies on a line if and only if the 
projection of the point lies on the projection of the line. Hence all state¬ 
ments about collinear points, concurrent lines, etc. that involve only 
I)oints, lines, and the incidence relation, are seen to be invariant under 
projection in the extended sense. This enables us to operate with the 
points at infinity in a plane x simply by operating with the corresponding 
ordinary points in a plane x' codrdinated with x by a projection. 

* The interpretation of the points at infinity of a plane x by means of 
projection from an external point 0 onto ordinary points in another 
plane x' may be used to give a concrete Euclidean “model” of the ex¬ 
tended plane. To this end we merely disregard the plane x' and fix our 
attention on x and the lines through 0. To each ordinary point of x 
corresponds a line through 0 not parallel to x; to each point at infinity 
of X corresponds a line through 0 parallel to x. Hence to the totality of 
all points, ordinary and ideal, of x corresponds the totality of all lines 
through the point 0, and this correspondence is biunique without 
exception. The points on a line of x will correspond to the lines in a 
plane through 0. A point and a line of x will be incident if and only if 
the corresponding line and plane through 0 are incident. Hence the 
geometry of incidence of points and lines in the extended plane is 
entirely equivalent to the geometry of incidence of the ordinary lines and 
planes through a fixed point of space. 

*In three dimensions the situation is similar, although we can no 
longer make matters intuitively clear by projection. Again we intro¬ 
duce a point at infinity associated with every family of parallel lines. 
In each plane we have a line at infinity. Next we have to introduce a 
new element, the plane at infinity, consisting of all points at infinity of 



IDEAL ELEMENTS AND PROJECTION 


185 


the space and containing all lines at infinity. Each ordinary plane inter¬ 
sects the plane at infinity in its line at infinity. 

3. Cross-Ratio with Elements at Infinity 

A remark must be made about cross-ratios involving elements at 
infinity. Let us denote the point at infinity on a straight line I by the 
symbol «. If A, B, C are three ordinary points on I, then we may 
assign a value to the symbol (ABC<») in the following way: choose a 
point P on 1; then (ABC») should be the limit approached by (ABCP) 
as P recedes to infinity along 1. But 



-ra/5i' 

and as P recedes to infinity, PA/PB approaches 1, Hence we define 

(ABCoo) ^ CA/CB. 

In particular, if (ABC = — 1, then C is the midpoint of the segment 
AB: the midpoint and the point at infinity in the direction of a segment 
divide the segment harmonically. 

Exercises: What is the cross-ratio of four lines , U if they are parallel? 

What is the cross-ratio if ^4 is the line at infinity? 

§5. APPLICATIONS 

L Preliminary Remarks 

With the introduction of elements at infinity it is no longer necessary 
to state explicitly the exceptional cases that arise in constructions and 
theorems when two or more lines are parallel. We need merely re¬ 
member that when a point is at infinity all the lines through that point 
are parallel. The distinction between central and parallel projection 
need no longer be made, since the latter simply means projection from 
a point at infinity. In Figure 72 the point 0 or the line PQR may be 



186 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVl 


at infinity (Fig. 85 shows the fonner case); it is left as an exercise for 
the reader to formulate in “finite” language the corresponding state¬ 
ments of Desargues’s theorem. 



P 


Fig. 85. Dasargues’s configuration with center at infinity. 

Not only the statement but even the proof of a projective theorem is 
often made simpler by the use of elements at infinity. The general 
principle is the following. By the “projective class” of a geometrical 
figure F we mean the class of all figures into which F may be carried 
by projective transformations. The projective properties of F will be 
identical with those of any member of its projective class, since pro¬ 
jective properties are by definition invariant under projection. Thus, 
any projective theorem (one involving only projective properties) that 
is true of F will be true of any member of the projective class of F, 
and conversely. Hence, in order to prove any such theorem for F, it 
suffices to prove it for any other member of the projective class of F. 
We may often take advantage of this by finding a special member of 
the projective class of F for which the theorem is simpler to prove than 
for F itself. For example, any two points A, B of a plane v can be 
projected to infinity by projecting from a center 0 onto a plane *■' 
parallel to the plane of 0, A, B; the straight lines through A and those 
through B will be transformed into two families of parallel lines. In 
the projective theorems to be proved in this section we shall make such 
a preliminary transformation. 

The following elementary fact about parallel lines will be useful. Let 
two straight lines, intersecting at a point 0, be cut by a pair of lines h 



PRELIMINARY REMARKS 


187 


and It at points A, B, C, D, as shown in Figure 86. If h and U are 
parallel then 



OA^OB^ 

OC OD' 

and conversely, if ^ then h and It are parallel. The proof 

C/C DD 

follows from elementary properties of similar triangles, and will be left 
to the reader. 


2. Proof of Desargues's Theorem in the Plane 

We now give the proof that for two triangles ABC and A'B'C' in a 
plane situated as shown in Figure 72, where the lines through corre¬ 
sponding vertices meet in a point, the intersections P, Q, R of the corre¬ 
sponding sides lie on a straight line. To do this we first project the 
figure so that Q and R go to infinity. After the projection, AB will be 
parallel to A'B', AC to A'C', and the figure will appear as shown in 
Figure 87. As we have pointed out in Article 1 of this section, to 



prove Desargut^s^s theorem in general it suffices to prove it for this special 
type of figure For this purpose we need only show that the inter¬ 
section of BC and B'C' also goes to infinity, so that BC is parallel to 



188 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATIC8 


livi 

B'C'\ then P, Q, R will indeed be collinear (since they will lie on the line 
at infinity). Now 

AB II A'B' implies - = 

V 8 

and 

AC \\A'C' implies - = -. 

y » 

Therefore ~ implies BC || B'C', which was to be proved. 

Note that this proof of Desargucs’s theorem makes use of the metric 
notion of the length of a segment. Thus we have proved a projective 
theorem by metric means. Moreover, if projective transformations are 
defined ^‘intrinsically*^ as plane transformations that preserve cross¬ 
ratio (see p. 177), then this proof remains entirely in the plane. 

Exercise: Prove, in a similar manner, the converse of Dcsargiics’s theorem: If 
triangles AEC and have the property that P^ Q, It are collinear, then the 

lines AA't BB\ CC\ are concurrent. 

3. Pascal’s Tbeoremf 

This theorem states: If the vertices of a hexagon lie alternately on a 
pair of intersecting lines^ then the three intersections P, Q, R of the opposite 
sides of the hexagon are collinear (Fig. 88). (The hexagon may intersect 
itself. The “opposite** sides can be recognized from the schematic 
diagram of Fig. 89.) 

By performing a preliminary projection we may assume that P and Q 
are at infinity. Then we need only show that R also is at infinity. 
The situation is illustrated in Figure 90, where 23 1| 56 and 12 |1 45. 
We must show that 16 1| 34. We have 

a _ b + y b _ a + x 

a + x'^b + y + s^ b + y ^ a +.x + r* 

Therefore 

a _ a + a; + r 
b b + y + 8* 

so that 16 II34, as was to be proved. 

t On p. 209 we shall discuss a more general theorem of the same type. The 
present special case is also known by the name of its discoverer. Pappus of Alex¬ 
andria (third century A.D.). 




190 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


livi 


4. Brianchon’s Theorem 

This theorem states: 7/ the sides of a hexagon pass alternately through 
two fixed points P and Q, then the three diagonals joining opposite pairs 
of vertices of the hexagon are concurrent (see Fig. 91). By a projection 



we may send to infinity the point P and the point where two of the 
diagonals, say 14 and 36, intersect. The situation will then appear 
as in Figure 92. Since 14 |1 36 we have a/b = u/v. But x/y = a/6 
and u/v = r/s. Therefore x/y = r/s and 36 || 25, so that all three of 
the diagonals are parallel and therefore concurrent. This suffices to 
prove the theorem in the general case. 


Q 



Fit. 92. Proof of BrianohoD’s tboorem. 



REMARK ON DUALITY 


191 


5. Remark on Duality 

The reader may have noticed the remarkable similarity between the 
theorems of Pascal (1623-1662) and Brianchon (1785-1864). This simi¬ 
larity becomes particularly striking if we write the theorems side by side: 


PascaVs Theorem 

If the vertices of a hexagon lie 
alternately on two straight lines j the 
points where opposite sides meet are 
collinear. 


Brianchon^s Theorem 

If the sides of a hexagon pass 
alternately through two points^ the 
lines joining opposite vertices are 
concurrent. 


Not only the theorems of Pascal and Brianchon, but all the theorems 
of projective geometry occur in pairs, each similar to the other, and, so 
to speak, identical in structure. This relationship is called duality. In 
plane geometry point and line are called dual elements. Drawing a line 
through a point, and marking a point on a line are dual operations. Two 
figures are dual if one may be obtained from the other by replacing each 
element and operation by its dual element or operation. Two theorems 
are dual if one becomes the other when all elements and operations are 
replaced by their duals. For example, Pascal's and Brianchon's theo¬ 
rems are dual, and the dual of Desargues's theorem is precisely its con¬ 
verse. This phenomenon of duality gives projective geometry a char¬ 
acter quite distinct from that of elementary (metric) geometry, in which 
no such duality exists. (For example, it would be meaningless to speak 
of the dual of an angle of 37® or of a segment of length 2.) In many 
textbooks on projective geometry the principle of dualityy which states 
that the dual of any true theorem of projective geometry is likewise a true 
theorem of projective geometryy is exhibited by placing the dual theorems 
together with their dual proofs in parallel columns on the page, as we 
have done above. The basic reason for this duality will be considered 
in the following section (see also p. 217). 


§6. ANALYTIC REPRESENTATION 

1. Introductory Remarks 

In the early development of projective geometry there was a strong 
tendency to build everything on a synthetic and ^^purely geometric" 
basis, avoiding the use of numbers and of algebraic methods. This 
program met with great difficulties, since there always remained places 
where some algebraic formulation seemed unavoidable. Complete suc¬ 
cess in building up a purely synthetic projective geometry was only 



192 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIVl 


attained toward the end of the nineteenth century, at a rather high 
cost in complication. In this respect the methods of analytic geometiy 
have been much more successful. The general tendency in modem 
mathematics is to base everything on the number concept, and in 
geometry this tendency, which started with Fermat and Descartes, has 
had decisive triumphs. Analytic geometry has developed from the 
status of a mere tool in geometrical reasoning to a subject where the 
intuitive geometrical interpretation of the operations and results is no 
longer the ultimate and exclusive goal, but has rather the function of a 
guiding principle that aids in suggesting and understanding the ana¬ 
lytical results. This change in the meaning of geometry is the product 
of a gradual historical growth that has greatly enlarged the scope of the 
classical geometry, and at the same time has brought about an almost 
organic union of geometry and analysis. 

In analytic geometry the '‘coordinates^^ of a geometrical object are 
any set of numbers which characterize that object uniquely. Thus a 
point is defined by giving its rectangular coordinates a:, y or its polar 
co5rdinates p, while a triangle can be defined by giving the coordinates 
of its three vertices, which requires six coordinates in all. We know 
that a straight line in the a:, y-plane is the geometrical locus of all points 
P (x, y) (see p. 75 for this notation) whose co5rdinates satisfy some 
linear equation 

(1) ax + by + c = 0. 

We may therefore call the three numbers o, b, c the "cofirdinates^^ of 
this line. For example, a=*0, b = l,c = 0 define the line y = 0, 
which is the x-axis; a=l, b = —l,c = 0 define the line x = y, which 
bisects the angle between the positive x-axis and the positive y-axis. 
In the same way, quadratic equations define "conic sections": 

X* + y’ = r* a circle, center at origin, radius r, 

(x — of -f (y — b)* = r* a circle, center at (a, b), radius r, 

^ ^ = 1 an ellipse, 

etc. 

The naive approach to analytic geometry is to start with purely 
“geometric” concepts—point, line, etc.—and then to translate these 
into the language of numbers. The modem viewpoint is the reverse. 
We start with the set of all paira of numbera x, y and caU each such pair 
a point, since we can, if we choose, interpret or viaualize such a pair of 



INTRODUCTORY REMARKS 


193 


numbers by the familiar notion of a geometrical point. Similarly, a 
linear equation between x and y is said to define a line. Such a shift of 
emphasis from the intuitive to the analytical aspect of geometry opens 
the way for a simple, yet rigorous, treatment of the points at infinity 
in projective geometry, and is indispensable for a deeper understanding 
of the whole subject. For those readers who possess a certain amount 
of preliminary training we shall give an account of this approach. 

*2. Homogeneous Coordinates. The Algebraic Basis of Duality 

In ordinary analytic geometry, the rectangular coordinates of a point 
in the plane are the signed distances of the point from a pair of per¬ 
pendicular axes. This system breaks down for the points at infinity in 
the extended plane of projective geometry. Hence if we wish to apply 
analytic methods to projective geometry it is necessary to find a coordi¬ 
nate system which shall embrace the ideal as well as the ordinary points. 
The introduction of such a coordinate system is best described by 
supposing the given X, F-pIane tt imbedded in three-dimensional space, 
where rectangular coordinates x, y, z (the signed distances of a point 
from the three coordinate planes determined by the x, y, and z axes) 
have been introduced. We place x parallel to the x, y coordinate plane 
and at a distance 1 above it, so that any point P of x will have the 
three-dimensional coordinates (X, F, 1). Taking the origin 0 of the 
coordinate system as the center of projection, we note that each point P 
determines a unique line through 0 and conversely, (See p, 184. The 
lines through 0 and parallel to x correspond to the points at infinity of tt.) 

We shall now describe a system of ‘‘homogeneous coordinates^' for 
the points of x. To find the homogeneous coordinates of any ordinary 
point P of X, we take the line through 0 and P and choose any point Q 
other than 0 on this line (see Fig. 93). Then the ordinary three- 
dimensional coordinates x, y^zolQ are said to be homogeneous coordinates 
of P. In particular, the coordinates (X, F, 1) of P itself are a set of 
homogeneous coordinates for P. Moreover, any other set of numbers 
(<X, iF, t) with t 0 will also be a set of homogeneous coordinates for P, 
since the coordinates of all points on the line OP other than 0 will be 
of this form. (We have excluded the point (0, 0, 0) since it lies on all 
lines through O and does not serve to distinguish one from another.) 

This method of introducing coordinates in the plane requires three 
numbers instead of two to specify the position of a point, and has the 
further disadvantage that the coordinates of a point are not determined 
uniquely but only up to an arbitrary factor t. But it has the great ad¬ 
vantage that the points at infinity in x are now included in the coordi- 



194 PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS [ IV 1 

r 

nate representation. A point P at infinity in t is determined by a line 
through 0 parallel to t. Any point Q on this line will have coordinates 
of the form (x, y, 0). Hence the homogeneous codrdinates of a point at 
infinity in r are of the form (x, y, 0). 



The equation in homogeneous coordinates of a straight line in ir is 
readily found by observing that the lines joining 0 to the points of this 
line lie in a plane through 0. It is proved in analytic geometry that 
the equation of such a plane is of the form 

ax + by + cz ^ 0. 

Hence this is the equation in homogeneous coordinates of a straight 
line in t. 

Now that the geometrical model of the points of t as lines through 0 
has served its purpose, we may lay it aside and give the following 
purely analytic definition of the extended plane: 

A point is an ordered triple of real numbei’s (x, y, 2 ), not all of which 
are zero. Two such triples, (xi, yi , Zi) and (xj, y ^, 22 ), define the same 
point if for some t 7 ^ 0, 

Xi = tXi , 

y2 = tyi, 

h ^ tu 



HOMOGENEOUS COORDINATES 


195 


In other words, the coordinates of any point may be multiplied by any 
non-zero factor without changing the point. (It is for this reason that 
they are called homogeneous coordinates.) A point (x, y, z) is an 
ordinary point if z 0; if z = 0, it is a point at infinity. 

A straight line in tt consists of all points (x, y, z) which satisfy a linear 
equation of the form 

(!') ax + 6^ + cz = 0, 

where a, 6, c are any three constants, not all zero. In particular, the 
points at infinity in tt all satisfy the linear equation 

(2) z = 0. 

This is by definition a line, and is called the line at infinity in tt. Since 
a line is defined by an equation of the form (!'), we call the triple of 
numbers (a, 6, c) the homogeneous coordinates of the line (!'). It follows 
that (to, to, to), for any t 9 ^ 0, are also coordinates of the line (!'), since 
the equation 

(3) (to)x + {tb)y + (to)z = 0 

is satisfied by the same coordinate-triples (x, y, z) as (!'). 

In these definitions we observe the perfect symmetry between point 
and line: each is specified by three homogeneous coordinates (w, y, w). 
The condition that the point (x, y, z) lie on the line (a, 6, c) is that 

ax + + cz = 0, 

and this is likewise the condition that the point whose coordinates are 
(a, 6, c) lie on the line whose coordinates are (x, y, z). For example, 
the arithmetical identity 

2.3 + 1-4 - 5.2 = 0 

may be interpreted equally well as meaning that the point (3, 4, 2) 
lies on the line (2, 1, —5) or that the point (2, 1,-5) lies on the line 
(3, 4, 2). This symmetry is the basis of the duality in projective geome¬ 
try between point and line, for any relationship between points and 
lines becomes a relationship between lines and points when the coordi¬ 
nates are properly re-interpreted. In the new interpretation the pre¬ 
vious coordinates of points and lines are now thought of as representing 
lines and points respectively. All the algebraic operations and results 
remain the same, but their interpretation gives the dual counterpart of 
the original theorem. It is to be noted that this duality does not hol\* 



106 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIV) 


in the ordinary plane of two codrdinates X, 7, since the equation of a 
straight line in ordinary co5rdinate8 

oX + 57 + c = 0 

is not symmetrical in X, 7 and a, 5, c. Only by including the 
points and the line at infinity is the principle of duality perfectly 
established. 

To pass from the homogeneous coordinates z, y, z of an ordinary point P in 
the plane .ir to ordinary rectangular codrdinates, we simply set X ■■ z/z, 7 ■■ y/z. 
Then X, V represent the distances from the point P to two perpendicular axes in 
w, parallel to the z~ and y-axes, as shown in Figure 93. We know that an equation 
of the form 

oX + 67 -f c - 0 

will represent a straight line in x. On substituting X - z/z, Y « y/z and multi¬ 
plying through by z we find that the equation of the same line in homogeneous co¬ 
ordinates is, as stated on page 105, 

az 4* by -f — 0. 

Thus the equation of the line 2a; — 3y -f « — 0 in ordinary rectangular coordinates 
X, Y is 2X — 3K -f 1 ■■ 0. Of course, the latter equation fails for the point at 
infinity on this line, one set of whose homogeneous codrdinates is (3, 2, 0). 

One thing remains to bo said. We have succeeded in giving a purely analytic 
definition of point and line, but what of the equally important concept of projec¬ 
tive transformation? It may be proved that a projective transformation of one 
plane onto another as defined on page 169 is given analytically by a set of linear 
equations, 

z* «■ Oix + biy 4" ciz, 

(4) 1/' - aix 4- 6jj/ 4- c*s, 

- oix 4* 6iy + ci«, 

connecting the homogeneous codrdinates z\ y\ z' of the points in the plane x' 
with the homogeneous codrdinates x, z of the points in the plane x. From 
our present point of view we may now define a projective transformation as one 
given by any set of linear equations of the form (4). The theorems of projective 
geometry then become theorems on the behavior of number triples (x, y, z) under 
such transformations. For example, the proof that the cross-ratio of four points 
on a lino is unchanged by such transformations becomes simply an exercise in 
the algebra of linear transformations. We cannot go further into the details of 
this analytic procedure. Instead we shall return to the more intuitive aspects 
of projective geometry. 

S7. PROBLEMS ON CONSTRUCTIONS WITH THE STRAIGHT- 
EDGE ALONE 

In the constructions below it is understood that only the straightedge is 
admitted as tool. 



PROBLEMS ON CONSTRUCTIONS 


197 


Problems 1 to 18 are contained in a paper by J. Steiner in which he proves 
that the compass can be dispensed with as a tool for geometrical constructions 
if a fixed circle with its center is given (see Chapt. Ill, p. 151). The reader is 
advised to solve these problems in the order given. 

A set of four lines a, 6, c, d through a point P is called harmonic, if the cross¬ 
ratio (abed) equals —1. a and h are said to be conjugate with respect to c and d, 
and vice versa. 

1) Prove; If, in a set of four harmonic lines a, h, c, d, the ray a bisects the angle 
between c and d, then h is perpendicular to a. 

2) Construct the fourth harmonic line to three given lines through a point. 
(Hint: Use the theorem on the complete quadrilateral.) 

3) Construct the fourth harmonic point to three points on a line. 

4) If a given right angle and a given arbitrary angle have their vertex and one 
side in common, double the given arbitrary angle. 

5) Given an angle and its bisector h. Construct a perpendicular to h through 
the vertex P of the given angle. 

6) Prove: If the lines h ,1% ,1%, ,ln through a point P intersect the straight 
line a in the points Ai , At, ••• , An and intersect the line b in the points 
Bi , Bt, •••, Bn i then all the intersections of the pairs of lines AiBk and AkBi 
(i 9 ^ k; i, k ^ 1,2, • • • , n) lie on a straight line. 

7) Prove: If a parallel to the side BC of the triangle ABC intersects AB in B' 
and AC in C\ then the line joining A with the intersection D of B'C and C*B 
bisects BC. 

7a) Formulate and prove the converse of 7. 

8) On a straight line I three point P, Q,Bare given, such that Q is the midpoint 
of the segment PR. Construct a parallel to I through a given point S. 

9) Given two parallel lines h and h ; bisect a given segment AB on l\ . 

10) Draw a parallel through a given point P to two given parallel lines and 
It . (Hint: Reduce 9 to 7 using 8.) 

11) Steiner gives the following solution to the problem of doubling a given 
line segment AB when a parallel ^ to AB is given: Through a point C not on I nor 
on the line AB draw CA intersecting f at Ai, CB intersecting I at Bi . Then 
(see 10) draw a parallel to I through C, which meets BAi at D. If DBx meets AB 
at E, then AE ** 2* AB. 

Prove the last statement. 

12) Divide a segment AB into n equal parts if a parallel I to AB is given. 
(Hint: Construct first the n-fold of an arbitrary segment on I, using 11.) 

13) Given a parallelogram A BCD, draw a parallel through a point P to a 
straight line 1. (Hint: Apply 10 to the center of the parallelogram and use 8.) 

14) Given a parallelogram, multiply a given segment by n. (Hint: Use 13 
and 11.) 

16) Given a parallelogram, divide a given segment into n parts. 

16) If a fixed circle and its center are given, draw a parallel to a given straight 
line through a given point. (Hint: Use 13.) 

17) If a fixed circle and its center are given, multiply and divide a given seg¬ 
ment by n. (Hint: Use 13.) 

18) Given a fixed circle and its center, draw a perpendicular to a given line 
through a given point. (Hint: Using a rectangle inscribed in the fixed circle 
and haviivg two sides parallel to the given line, reduce to previous exercised.) 



198 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVl 


19) Using the results of problems 1-18, which basic construction problems can 
you solve if your tool is a ruler with two parallel edges? 

20) Two given straight lines h and 1% intersect at a point P outside the given 
sheet of paper. Construct the line joining a given point Q with P. (Hint; 
Complete the given elements to the figure of Desargues’s theorem for the plane 
in such a way that P and Q become intersections of corresponding sides of the 
two triangles in Desargues’s Theorem.) 

21) Construct the line joining two given points whose distance is greater than 
the length of the straightedge used. (Hint: Use 20.) 

22) Two points P and Q outside the given sheet of paper are determined by 
two pairs of straight lines h , U and mi, m 2 through P and Q, respectively. Con¬ 
struct that part of the line PQ that lies on the given sheet of paper. (Hint; To 
obtain a point of PQ complete the given elements to a figure of Desargues’s theorem 
in such a way that one triangle has two sides on h and yni and the other one 
corresponding sides on h and m 2 .) 

23) Solve 20 by means of Pascal’s theorem (p. 188). (Hint; Complete the given 
elements to a figure of Pascal’s theorem, using , ^2 as a pair of opposite sides of 
the hexagon and Q as point of intersection of another pair of opposite sides.) 

*24) Two straight lines entirely outside the given sheet of paper are each given 
by two pairs of straight lines intersecting at points of the lines outside the paper. 
Determine their point of intersection by a pair of lines through it. 

§8. CONICS AND QUADRIC SURFACES 

1. Elementary Metric Geometry of Conics 

Until now we have been concerned only with points, lines, planes, and 
figures formed by a number of these. If projective geometry were 
nothing but the study of such 'Minear'^ figure^s, it would be of relatively 
little interest. It is a fact of fundamental importance that projective 
geometry is not confined to the study of linear figures, but includes also 
the whole field of conic sections and their generalizations in higher 
dimensions. Apollonius' metric treatment of the conic sections— 
ellipses, hyperbolas, and parabolas—was one of the great mathematical 
achievements of antiquity. The importance of conic sections for pure 
and applied mathematics (for example, the orbits of the planets and of 
the electrons in the hydrogen atom are conic sections) can hardly be 
overestimated. It is little wonder that the classical Greek theory of 
conic sections is still an indispensable part of mathematical instruction. 
But Greek geometry was by no means final. Two thousand years later 
the important projective properties of the conics were discovered. In 
spite of the simplicity and beauty of these properties, academic inertia 
has so far prevented their introduction into the high school curriculum. 

We shall begin by recalling the metric definitions of the conic sections. 
There are various such definitions whose equivalence is shown in ele- 



ELEMENTARY METRIC GEOMETRY OF CONICS 


199 


mentary geometry. The usual ones refer to the /oct. An ellipse is de¬ 
fined as the geometrical locus of all points P in the plane the sum of 
whose distances, n, r 2 , from two fixed points Fi, F 2 , the foci, has a 
constant value. (If the two foci coincide the figure is a circle.) The 
hyperbola is defined as the locus of all points P in the plane for which the 
absolute value of the difference ri — r 2 is equal to a fixed constant. 
The parabola is defined as the geometrical locus of all points P for 
which the distance r to a fixed point F is equal to the distance to a given 
line I, 

In terms of analytic geometry these curves can all be expressed by 
equations of the second degree in the coordinates Xj y. It is not hard 
to prove, conversely, that any curve defined analytically by an equation 
of the second degree: 

ax^ -f- by^ + cxy + dx + ey + f = 0, 

is either one of the three conics, a straight line, a pair of straight lines, 
a point, or imaginary. This is usually proved by introducing a new and 
suitable coordinate system, as is done in any course in analytic geometry. 

These definitions of the conic sections are essentially metric, since 
they make use of the concept of distance. But there is another defi¬ 
nition that establishes the place of the conic sections in projective 
geometry: The conic sections are simply the projections of a circle on a plane. 
If we project a circle C from a point 0, then the projecting lines will 
form an infinite double cone, and the intersection of this cone with a 
plane t will be the projection of C, This intersection will be an ellipse 
or a hyperbola according as the plane cuts one or both portions of the 
cone. The intermediate case of the parabola occurs if tt is parallel to 
one of the lines through 0 (see Fig. 94). 

The projecting cone need not be a right circular cone with its vertex 0 
perpendicularly above the center of the circle C; it may also be oblique. 
In all cases, as we shall here accept without proof, the intersection of 
the cone with a plane will be a curve whose equation is of second degree; 
and conversely, every curve of second degree can be obtained from a 
circle by such a projection. It is for this reason that the curves of 
second degree are called conic sections. 

When the plane intersects only one portion of a right circular cone 
we have stated that the curve of intersection E is an ellipse. We may 
prove that E satisfies the usual focal definition of the ellipse, as given 
above, by a simple but beautiful argument given in 1822 by the Belgian 
mathematician G. P. Dandelin. The proof is based on the introduction 



200 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIV 

of the two spheres Si and St (Fig. 96), which are tangent to x at the 
points Fi and Fa, respectively, and which touch the cone along the 
parallel circles Ki and Ka respectively. We join an arbitrary point 



P of E with Fi and Fa and draw the line joining P to the vertex 0 of the 
cone. This line lies entirely on the surface of the cone, and intersects 
the circles Ki and Ka in the points Qi and Qa respectively. Now PFi 
and PQi are two tangents from P to , so that 

PFi^ PQi. 


Similarly, 


PFa = PQa . 


Adding these two equations we obtain 

PFi + PFa = PQi + PQa . 




ELEMENTARY METRIC GEOMETRY OF CONICS 201 

But PQi + PQt = Q 1 Q 2 is just the distance along the surface of the 
cone between the parallel circles Ki and jRCrand is therefore independent 
of the particular choice of the point P on E. The resulting equation, 


PFi + PF% = constant 
0 



for all points P of is precisely the focal definition of an ellipse. E is 
therefore an ellipse and Fi, F% are its foci. 

Exercise: When a plane cuts both portions of the cone, the curve of intersec¬ 
tion is a hyperbola. Prove this fact, using one sphere in each portion of the cone. 

2 . Projective Properties of Conics 

On the basis of the facts stated in the preceding section we shall 
adopt the tentative definition: a conic is the projection of a circle on a 
plane. This definition is more in keeping with the spirit of projective 



202 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVJ 


geometry than is the usual focal definition, since the latter is entirely 
based on the metric notion of distance. Even our present definition is 
not free from this defect, since “circle” is also a concept of metric geome¬ 
try. We shall in a moment arrive at a purely projective definition 
of the conics. 

Since we have agreed that a conic is merely the projection of a circle 
(i.e., that the word “conic” is to mean any curve in the projective 
class of the circle; see p. 186), it follows that any property of the 
circle that is invariant under projection will also be possessed by any 
conic. Now a circle has the well-known (metric) property that a given 
arc subtends the same angle at every point 0 on the circle. In Figure 96, 
the angle AOB subtended by the arc AB\s independent of the position 
of O, This fact can be brought into relation with the projective concept 
of cross-ratio by considering not two points A, B but four points A, B, 
(7, D on the circle. The four lines a, b, c, d joining them to a fifth 
point 0 on the circle will have a cross-ratio (abed) which depends 
only on the angles subtended by the arcs CA, CB, DA, DB, If we 



join A, B, C, D to another point O' on the circle, we obtain four rays 
o', b', c', d'. From the property of the circle just mentioned, the two 
quadruples of rays will be “congruent.”t Hence they will have the 
same cross-ratio: (o' b' c'd') = (a b c d). If we now project the 

t A set of four concurrent lines a, 6, c, d is said to be congruent to another 
set a', 6', c', d' if the angles between every pair of lines of the first set are equal 
and have the same sense as the angles between corresponding lines of the second 

set. 


PROJECTIVE PROPERTIES OF CONICS 


203 


circle into any conic K, we shall obtain on K four points, again called 
Af Bf C, Df two other points 0, O', and the two quadruples of lines 
a, 6, c, d and a', 6', c', d\ These quadruples will not be congruent, 
since equality of angles is in general destroyed by projection. But since 
cross-ratio is invariant under projection, the equality (a 6 c d) = 
(a' 6' c' d') will still hold. This leads to a fundamental theorem: 
If any four given points A, B, C, D o/ a conic K are joined to a fifth point 
0 of K by lines a, b, c, d, then the value of the cross-ratio (abed) is 
independent of the position of 0 on K (Fig. 97). 



This is indeed a remarkable result. We already knew that any four 
given points on a straight line appear under the same cross-ratio from 
any fifth point 0. This theorem on cross-ratios is the basic fact of 
projective geometry. Now we learn that the same is true of four points 
on a conic, with one important restriction: the fifth point is no longer 
absolutely free in the plane, but is still free to move on the given conic. 

It is not difficult to prove a converse of this result in the following 
form: if there are two points 0, 0' on a curve K such that every quad¬ 
ruple of four points A, B, C, D on X appears under the same cross¬ 
ratio from both 0 and O', then X is a conic, (and therefore A, B, C, D 
appear under the same cross-ratio from any third point 0" of K), The 
proof is omitted here. 

These projective properties of the conics suggest a general method for 
constructing such curves. By a pencil of lines we shall mean the 
set of all straight lines in a plane which pass through a given point 0. 
Now consider the pencils through two points 0 and 0' which are chosen 
to lie on a conic K, Between the lines of pencil 0 and those of pencil 0' 
we may establish a biunique correspondence by coupling a line a of 0 
with a line a' of 0' whenever a and a' meet in a point A of the conic K, 
Then any four lines a, 6, c, d of the pencil 0 will have the same cross-ratio 



204 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVl 


as the four corresponding lines a', 6', o', d' of O'. Any biunique cor¬ 
respondence between two pencils of lines which has this property is 
called a projective correspondence, (This definition is obviously the 
dual of the definition given on p. 178 of a projective correspondence 
between the points on two lines.) Pencils between which there is 
defined a projective correspondence are said to be projectively related. 
With this definition we can now state: The conic K is the locus of the 
intersections of corresponding lines of two projectively related pencils. 
This theorem provides the basis for a purely projective definition of the 
conics: A conic is the locus of the intersections of corresponding lines in two 
projectively related pencils,^ It is tempting to follow the path into the 
theory of conics opened by this definition, but we shall confine ourselves 
to a few remarks. 

Pairs of projectively related pencils can be obtained as follows. 
Project all the points P on a straight line I from two different centers 0 
and 0"; in the projecting pencils let lines a and a" which intersect on I 



correspond to each other. Then the two pencils will be projectively 
related. Now take the pencil 0" and transport it rigidly into any 
position O'. The resulting pencil O' will be projectively related to 0. 
Moreover, any projective correspondence between two pencils can be so 
obtained. (This fact is the dual of Ex. 1 on p. 179.) If the pencils 0 
and 0' are congruent, we obtain a circle. If angles are equal but with 
opposite sense, the conic is an equilateral hyperbola (see Fig. 99). 

Note that this definition of conic may yield a locus which is a straight 
line, as in Figure 98. In this case the line 0 0" corresponds to itself, 

t This locus may, under certain circumstances, degenerate into a straight line: 

see Fig. 98. 


PROJECTIVE PROPERTIES OF CONICS 


205 


and all its points are counted as belonging to the locus. Hence the 
conic degenerates into a pair of lines, which agrees with the fact there 
are sections of a cone (those obtained by planes through the vertex) 
which consist of two lines. 



Fig. 99. Circle and equilateral hyperbola generated by projective pencils. 

Exercises: 1) Draw ellipses, hyperbolas, and parabolas by means of projective 
pencils. (The reader is strongly urged to experiment with such constructions. 
They will contribute greatly to his understanding.) 

2) Given five points, O, O', A, B, C, of an unknown conic K. It is re¬ 
quired to construct the point D where a given line d through 0 intersects K. 
(Hint: Consider through O the rays a, 6, c given by OA, OB, 00, and similarly 
through O' the rays a', 6', c'. Draw through O the ray d and construct through 
0' the ray d' such that (a, 6, c, d) = (a', 6', c', d'). Then the intersection of d 
and d' is necessarily a point of K.) 

3. Conics as Line Curves 

The concept of tangent to a conic belongs to projective geometry, for 
a tangent to a conic is a straight line that touches the conic in only 
one point, and this property is unchanged by projection. The pro¬ 
jective properties of tangents to conics are based on the following funda¬ 
mental theorem: The cross^-ratio of the points of intersection of any four 
fixed tangents to a conic with a fifth tangent is the same for every position 
of the fifth tangent. 

The proof of this theorem is very simple. Since a conic is a projection 
of a circle, and since the theorem concerns only properties which are 



206 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVJ 


invariant under projection, a proof for the case of the circle will suffice 
to establish the theorem in general. 



Fig. 100. A drele m » let of tangeota. 

For the circle, the theorem is a matter of elementary geometry. Let 
P, 0, Ry S be any four points on a circle K with the tangents a, by c, d; 
T another point with the tangent o, intersected by o, by Cy din Ay By C, D. 
If M is the center of the circle, then obviously 4- TMA = J TMP, 



Fig. 101. The tangent property of the circle. 

and J 4- TMP is equal to the angle subtended by the arc TP at a point 
of K. Similarly, ^ TMB is the angle subtended by the arc TQ at a 

point of K. Therefore ^ AMB = where iPQ is the angle sub- 



CONICS AS LINE CURVES 


207 


tended by the arc PQ at a point of K. Hence the pomts A, B, C,D 
are projected from M by four rays whose angles are given by the fixed 
positions of P, Q, P, S. It follows that the cross-ratio (A B C D) 
depends only on the four tangents a, b, c, d and not on the particular 
position of the fifth tangent o. This is exactly the theorem that we 
had to prove. 

In the preceding section we have seen that a conic may be constructed 
by marking the points of intersection of corresponding lines in two pro- 
jectively related pencils. The theorem just proved enables us to dualize 
this construction. Let us take two tangents a and a' of a conic K, A 
third tangent t will intersect a and a' in two points A and A' respectively. 
If we allow t to move along the conic, this will set up a correspondence 

A A' 

between the points of a and those of a'. This correspondence between 
the points of a and those of a' will be projective, for by our theorem 
any four points of a will have the same cross-ratio as the corresponding 
four points of a'. Hence it appears that o come K, regarded as the set 
of its tangents, consists of the lines which join corresponding points of the 
two projectively related ranges] of points on a and a'. 



t The set of points on a straight line is called a rangt of points. This is the 
dual of a pencil of lines. 


208 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIVJ 


This fact may be used to give a projective definition of a conic as a 
“line curve.“ Let us compare it with the projective definition of a 
conic given in the preceding section: 


A conic as a set of points con¬ 
sists of the points of intersection of 
corresponding lines in two pro- 
jectively related pencils of lines. 


II 

A conic as a set of lines consists 
of the lines joining corresponding 
points in two projectively related 
ranges of points. 



Fig. 103. A parabola defined by congruent point ranges- 



Fig. 104. A parabola defined by similar point ranges. 


If we regard the tangent to a conic at a point as the dual element to 
the point itself, and if we consider a “line curve” (the set of all its 


CONICS AS LINE CURVES 


209 


tangents) as the dual of a ^‘point curve” (the set of all its points), then 
the complete duality between these two statements is apparent. In the 
translation from one statement to the other, replacing each concept by 
its dual, the word “conic” remains the same: in one case it is a “point 
conic,” defined by its points; in the other a “line conic,” defined by its 
tangents. (Sec Fig. 100, p. 206.) 

An important consequence of this fact is that the principle of duality 
in plane projective geometry, originally stated for points and lines only, 
may now be extended to cover conics. //, in the statement of any theorem 
concerning points, lines, and conics, each element is replaced by its dual 
(keeping in mind that the dual of a point on a conic is a tangent to the 
conic), the result will also be a true theorem. An example of the working 
of this principle will be found in Article 4 of this section. 

The construction of conics as line curves is shown in Figures 103-104. 
If, on the two projectively related point ranges, the two points at 
infinity correspond to each other (as must be the case with congruent or 
similar! ranges), the conic will be a parabola; the converse is also true. 

Exercise: Prove the converse theorem: On any two fixed tangents of a parabola 
a moving tangent cuts out two similar point ranges. 

4. Pascal’s and Brianchon’s General Theorems for Conics 

One of the best illustrations of the duality principle for conics is the 
relation between the general theorems of Pascal and of Brianchon. The 
first was discovered in 1640, the second only in 1806. Yet one is an 
immediate consequence of the other, since any theorem involving only 
conics, straight lines, and points must remain true if replaced by its 
dual statement. 

The theorems stated in §5 under the same name are degenerate 
cases of the following more general theorems: 

PascaVs theorem: The opposite edges of a hexagon inscribed in a conic 
meet in three collinear points. 

Brianchon^s theorem: The three diagonals joining opposite vertices of a 
hexagon circumscribed about a conic are concurrent. 

Both theorems are clearly of a projective character. Their dual 
nature becomes obvious if they are formulated as follows: 

PascaVs theorem: Given six points, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, on a conic. Join 
successive points by the lines (1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4), (4, 5), (5, 6), (6, 1). 

t It is obvious what is meant by a ^^congruent” or a “similar” correspondence 
between two ranges of points. 



210 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IV] 


Mark the points of intersection of (1, 2) with (4, 6), (2, 3) with (5, 6), 
and (3, 4) with (6, 1). Then these three points of intersection lie on a 
straight line. 

Brianchm's theorem: Given six tangents, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, to a conic. 
Successive tangents intersect in the points, (1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4), (4, 5), 
(6, 6), (6, 1). Draw the lines joining (1, 2) with (4, 6), (2, 3) with 
(6, 6), and (3, 4) with (6, 1). Then these lines go through a point. 



Fig 106. PMoal’s genertl configuration. Two obsm arc illuatrated; one for the hexagon 1. 2. 3,4,5.6, 
and one for the hexagon 1, 8, 6, 3, 6, 4. 


The proofs can be given by a specialization similar to that used in 
the degenerate cases. To prove Pascal’s theorem, let A, B; C, D, E, F 
be the vertices of a hexagon inscribed in a conic K. By projection we 
can make AB parallel to ED and FA parallel to CD, so that we obtain 
the configuration of Figure 107. (For convenience in representation 
the hexagon is taken as self-intersecting, although this is not necessary.) 
Pascal’s theorem now reduces to the simple statement that CB is 
parallel to FE; in other words, the line on which the opposite edges of 
the hexagon meet is the line at infinity. To prove this, let ris consider 


PASCAL’S AND BRIANCHON’S THEOREMS 


211 



Fig. 106. Briancboa’s general configuration; Again two cases are illustrated.. 



Fig. 107. Proof of Pascal's theorem. 


212 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVl 


the points F, i4, D, which, as we know, are projected by rays having 
a constant cross-ratio k from any other point of Kj e.g., from C or E, 
Project these points from C; then the projecting rays intersect AF in 
four points, F, il, F, oo, which have the cross-ratio k. Hence YF :Y A = 
k. (See p. 185.) If the same points are now projected from E onto 
BA, we obtain 

k = (XABoo) = BX:BA. 

Hence we have 

BX:BA = YFiYA, 

which establishes the parallelism of YB and FX, This completes the 
proof of Pascals theorem. 

Brianchon’s theorem follows either by the duality principle or by 
direct reasoning dual to the above. The reader will find it a good 
exercise to carry out the details of the argument. 

5. The Hyperboloid 

In three dimensions the figures that correspond to the conics in the 
plane are the ‘^quadric surfaces^^; of these the sphere and the ellipsoid 
are special cases. These surfaces offer more variety and considerably 
more difficulty than do the conics. Here we shall discuss briefly and 
without giving proofs one of the more interesting quadrics, the “one- 
sheeted hyperboloid.” 

This surface may be defined in the following manner. Choose any 
three lines, k, k, h, in general position in space. By this we mean 
that no two of the lines are to lie in the same plane nor are they all to 
be parallel to any one plane. It is a rather surprising fact that there 
will be infinitely many lines in space each of which intersects all three 
of the given lines. To see this, let us take any plane t through k . 
Then w will intersect k and k in two points, and the line m joining 
these two points will intersect h, k, and k • As the plane r rotates 
about h , the line m will move, always intersecting h , k y k , and will 
generate a surface of infinite extent. This surface is the one-sheeted 
hyperboloid; it contains an infinite family of straight lines of the type m. 
Any three of these lines, mi, , mz, will also be in general position, 

and all the lines in space that intersect these three lines will also lie 
in the surface of the hyperboloid. This is the fundamental fact con¬ 
cerning the hyperboloid; it is made up of two different families of 
straight lines; every three lines of the same family are in general posi- 



THE HYPERBOLOID 


213 


tion, while each line of one family intersects all the lines of the other 
family. 

An important projective property of the hyperboloid is that the cross¬ 



rig. 108. Construction of lines intersecting three fixed lines in general position. 



Fig. 109. The hyperboloid. 




214 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVl 


ratio of the four points where any four given lines of one family intersect 
a given line of the other family is independent of the position of the 
latter line. This follows directly from the method of construction of 
the hyperboloid by a rotating plane, as the reader may show as an 
exercise. 

One of the most remarkable properties of the hyperboloid is that 
although it contains two families of intersecting straight lines, these 
lines do not make the surface rigid. If a model of the surface is con¬ 
structed from wire rods, free to rotate at each intersection, then the 
whole figure may be continuously deformed into a variety of shapes. 


§9. AXIOMATICS AND NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 

1. The Axiomatic Method 

The axiomatic method in mathematics goes back at least as far as 
Euclid. By no means is it true that Greek mathematics was developed 
or presented exclusively in the rigid postulational form of the Elements, 
But so great was the impression made by this work on subsequent genera¬ 
tions that it became a model for all rigorous demonstration in mathe¬ 
matics. Sometimes even philosophers, e.g. Spinoza in his Ethica^ more 
geometrico demonstrataj tried to present arguments in the form of theo¬ 
rems deduced from definitions and axioms. In modern mathematics, 
after a departure from the Euclidean tradition during the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries, there has been an increasing penetration of 
the axiomatic method into every field. One of the most recent results 
has been the creation of a new discipline, mathematical logic. 

In general terms the axiomatic point of view can be described as 
follows: To prove a theorem in a deductive system is to show that the 
theorem is a necessary logical consequence of some previously proved 
propositions; these, in, turn, must themselves be proved; and so on. 
The process of mathematical proof would therefore be the impossible 
task of an infinite regression unless, in going back, one is permitted to 
stop at some point. Hence there must be a number of statements, 
called postulates or axioms^ which are accepted as true, and for which 
proof is not required. From these we may attempt to deduce all other 
theorems by purely logical argument. If the facts of a scientific field 
are brought into such a logical order that all can be shown to follow 
from a selected number of (preferably few, simple, and plausible) state¬ 
ments, then the field is said to be presented in an axiomatic form. The 



THE AXIOMATIC METHOD 


215 


choice of the propositions selected as axioms is to a large extent arbi¬ 
trary. But little is gained by the axiomatic method unless the postu¬ 
lates are simple and not too great in number. Moreover, the postulates 
miist be consistent, in the sense that no two theorems deducible from 
them can be mutually contradictory, and complete, so that every theorem 
of the system is deducible from them. For reasons of economy it is 
also desirable that the postulates be independent, in the sense that no 
one of them is a logical consequence of the others. The question of the 
consistency and of the completeness of a set of axioms has been the 
subject of much controversy. Different philosophical convictions con¬ 
cerning the ultimate roots of human knowledge have led to apparently 
irreconcilable views on the foundations of mathematics. If mathemati¬ 
cal entities are considered as substantial objects in a realm of “pure in¬ 
tuition”, independent of definitions and of individual acts of the human 
mind, then of course there can be no contradictions, since mathematical 
facts are objectively true statements describing existing realities. From 
this “Kantian” point of view there is no problem of consistency. Un¬ 
fortunately, however, the actual body of mathematics cannot be fitted 
into such a simple philosophical framework. The modern mathematical 
intuitionists do not rely on pure intuition in the broad Kantian sense. 
They accept the denumerably infinite as the legitimate child of intuition, 
and they admit only constructive properties; but thus basic concepts 
such as the number continuum would be banished, important parts 
of actual mathematics excluded, and the rest almost hopelessly com¬ 
plicated. 

Quite different is the view taken by the “formalists.” They do not 
attribute an intuitive reality to mathematical objects, nor do they claim 
that axioms express obvious truths concerning the realities of pure 
intuition; their concern is only with the formal logical procedure of 
reasoning on the basis of postulates. This attitude has a definite ad¬ 
vantage over intuitionism, since it grants to mathematics all the freedom 
necessary for theory and applications. But it imposes on the formalist 
the necessity of proving that his axioms, now appearing as arbitrary 
creations of the human mind, cannot possibly lead to a contradiction. 
Great efforts have been made during the last twenty years to find such 
consistency proofs, at least for the axioms of arithmetic and algebra 
and for the concept of the number continuum. The results are highly 
sig^nificant, but success is still far off. Indeed, recent results indicate 
that such efforts cannot be completely successful, in the sense that 
proofs for consistency and completeness are not possible within strictly 



216 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


tIV] 


closed systems of concepts. Remarkably enough, all these arguments 
on foundations proceed by methods that in themselves are thoroughly 
constructive and directed by intuitive patterns. 

Accentuated by the paradoxes of set theory (see p. 87), the clash 
between the intuitionists and the formalists has been much publicized 
by passionate partisans of these schools. The mathematical world has 
resounded with a cry about the ‘^crisis in the foundations.^' But the 
alarm was not, and must not be, taken too seriously. With all credit 
to the achievements produced in the struggle for clarification of the 
foundations, it would be completely unjustified to infer that the living 
body of mathematics is in the least threatened by such differences of 
opinion or by the paradoxes inherent in an uncontrolled drift towards 
boundless generality. 

Quite apart from philosophical considerations and from interest in 
foundations, the axiomatic approach to a mathematical subject is the 
natural way to unravel the network of interconnections between the 
various facts and to exhibit the essential logical skeleton of the structure. 
It sometimes happens that such a concentration on the formal structure 
rather than on the intuitive meaning of the concepts makes it easier to 
find generalizations and applications that might have been overlooked 
in a more intuitive approach. But a significant discovery or an illu¬ 
minating insight is rarely obtained by an exclusively axiomatic pro¬ 
cedure. Constructive thinking, guided by the intuition, is the true 
source of mathematical dynamics. Although the axiomatic form is an 
ideal, it is a dangerous fallacy to believe that axiomatics constitutes the 
essence of mathematics. The constructive intuition of the mathemati¬ 
cian brings to mathematics a non-deductive and irrational element which 
makes it comparable to music and art. 

Since the days of Euclid, geometry has been the prototype of an 
axiomatized discipline. For centuries Euclid's set of axioms has been 
the object of intensive study. But only recently has it become apparent 
that his postulates must be modified and completed if all of elemen¬ 
tary geometry is to be deducible from them. Late in the nineteenth 
century, for example, Pasch discovered that the ordering of points on a 
line, the notion of “betweenness," requires a special postulate. Pasch 
formulated the following statement as an axiom: A straight line that 
intersects one side of a triangle in any point other than a vertex must 
also intersect another side of the triangle. (Lack of regard for such 
details leads to many apparent paradoxes in which absurd consequences 
—e.g. the well-known ‘‘proof" that every triangle is isosceles—seem to 



THE AXIOMATIC METHOD 


217 


be deduced rigorously from Euclidaxioms. This is usually done on 
the basis of an improperly drawn figure whose lines seem to intersect 
inside or outside certain triangles or circles, whereas they really do not.) 

In his famous book, Grundlagen der Geometric (first edition published 
in 1901), Hilbert gave a satisfactory set of axioms for geometry and at 
the same time made an exhaustive study of their mutual independence, 
consistency, and completeness. 

Into any set of axioms there must enter certain undefined concepts, 
such as ‘‘point” and “line” in geometry. Their “meaning” or connec¬ 
tion with objects of the physical world is mathematically unessential. 
They can be regarded as purely abstract entities whose mathematical 
properties in a deductive system are given entirely by the relations that 
hold among them as stated by the axioms. For example, in projective 
geometry we might begin with the undefined concepts of “point,” 
“line,” and “incidence,” and with the two dual axioms: “Each two 
distinct points are incident with a unique line” and “Each two distinct 
lines are incident with a unique point.” From the point of view of 
axiomatics, the dual form of such axioms is the very source of the 
principle of duality in projective geometry. Any theorem which con¬ 
tains in its statement and proof only elements connected by dual axioms 
must admit of dualization. For the proof of the original theorem con¬ 
sists in the successive application of certain axioms, and the application 
of the dual axioms in the same order will provide a proof for the dual 
theorem. 

The totality of axioms of geometry provides the implicit definition of 
all “undefined” geometrical terms such as “line,” “point,” “incident,” 
etc. For applications it is important that the concepts and axioms of 
geometry correspond well with physically verifiable statements about 
“real,” tangible objects. The physical reality behind the concept of 
“point” is that of a very small object, such as a pencil dot, while a 
“straight line” is an abstraction from a stretched thread or a ray of 
light. The properties of these physical points and straight lines arc 
found by experience to agree more or less with the formal axioms of 
geometry. Quite conceivably more precise experiments might necessi¬ 
tate modification of these axioms if they are adequately to describe 
physical phenomena. But if the formal axioms did not agree more or 
less with the properties of physical objects, then geometry would be of 
little interest. Thus, even for the formalist, there is an authority other 
than the human mind, that decides the direction of mathematical 
thought. 



218 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIVJ 


2. Hyperbolic Non>EucIidean Geometry 

There is one axiom of Euclidean geometry whose “truth,” that is, 
whose correspondence with empirical data about stretched threads or 
light rays, is by no means obvious. This is the famous postulate of the 
unique parallel, which states that through any point not on a given line 
one and only one line can be drawn parallel to the given line. The 
remarkable feature of this axiom is that it makes an assertion about the 
whole extent of a straight line, imagined as extending indefinitely in 
either direction; for to say that two lines are parallel is to say that they 
never intersect, no matter how far they may be produced. It goes 
without saying that there are many lines through a point which do not 
intersect a given line within any fixed finite distance, however large. 
Since the maximum possible length of an actual ruler, thread, or even a 
light ray visible to a telescope is certainly finite, and since within any 
finite circle there are infinitely many straight lines through a given 
point and not intersecting a given line inside the circle, it follows that 
this axiom can never be verified by experiment. All the other axioms 
of Euclidean geometry have a finite character in that they deal with 
finite portions of lines and with plane figures of finite extent. The fact 
that the parallel axiom is not experimentally verifiable raises the ques¬ 
tion of whether or not it is independent of the other axioms. If it were a 
necessary logical consequence of the others, then it would be possible to 
strike it out as an axiom and to give a proof of it in terms of the other 
Euclidean axioms. For centuries mathematicians tried to find such a 
proof, because of the widespread feeling among students of geometry 
that the parallel postulate is of a character essentially different from 
the others, lacking the sort of compelling plausibility which an axiom 
of geometry should possess. One of the first attempts of this nature 
was made by Proclus (fourth century A.D.), a commentator on Euclid, 
who tried to dispense with the need for a si>ecial parallel postulate by 
defining the parallel to a given line to be the locus of all points at a 
given fixed distance from the line. In this he failed to observe that the 
difficulty was only shifted to another place, for it would then be necessary 
to prove that the locus of such points is in fact a straight line. Since 
Proclus could not prove this, he would have to accept it instead of the 
parallel axiom as a postulate, and nothing would be gained, for the two 
are easily seen to be equivalent. The Jesuit Saccheri (1667-1733), 
and later Lambert (1728-1777), tried to prove the parallel postulate by 
the indirect method of assuming the contrary and drawing absurd 



HYPERBOLIC NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 


219 


consequences. Far from being absurd, their conclusions really 
amounted to theorems of the non-Euclidean geometry developed later. 
Had they regarded them not as absurdities, but rather as self-consistent 
statements, they would have been the discoverers of non-Euclidean 
geometry. 

At that time, any geometrical system not absolutely in accordance 
with Euclid's would have been considered as obvious nonsense. Kant, 
the most influential philosopher of the period, formulated this attitude 
in the statement that Euclid's axioms are inherent in the human mind, 
and therefore have an objective validity for *^real" space. This belief 
in the axioms of Euclidean geometry as unalterable truths, existing in 
the realm of pure intuition, was one of the basic tenets of Kant's phi¬ 
losophy. But in the long run, neither old habits of thinking nor philo¬ 
sophical authority could suppress the conviction that the unending 
record of failure in the search for a proof of the parallel postulate was 
due not to any lack of ingenuity, but rather to the fact that the parallel 
postulate is really independent of the others. (In much the same way, 
the lack of success in proving that the general equation of the fifth degree 
could be solved by radicals led to the suspicion, later verified, that such 
a solution is impossible.) The Hungarian Bolyai (1802-1860) and the 
Russian Lobachevsky (1793-1856), settled the question by constructing 
in all detail a geometry in which the parallel axiom does not hold. When 
the enthusiastic young genius Bolyai submitted his paper to Gauss, the 
^^prince of mathematicians," for the recognition he so eagerly expected, 
he was informed that his work had been anticipated by Gauss himself, 
but that the latter had not cared to publish his results because he 
dreaded noisy publicity. 

What does the independence of the parallel postulate mean? Simply 
that it is possible to construct a consistent system of "geometrical" 
statements dealing with points, lines, etc., by deduction from a set of 
axioms in which the parallel postulate is replaced by a contrary postulate. 
Such a system is called a non-Euclidean geometry. It required the in¬ 
tellectual courage of Gauss, Bolyai, and Lobachevsky to realize that such 
a geometry, based on a non-Euclidean system of axioms, can be per¬ 
fectly consistent. 

To show the consistency of the new geometry, it is not enough to de¬ 
duce a large body of non-Euclidean theorems, as Bolyai and Lobachev¬ 
sky did. Instead, we have learned to build "models" of such a geom¬ 
etry which satisfy all the axioms of Euclid except for the parallel 
postulate. The simplest such model was given by Felix Klein, whose 



220 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIV] 


work in the field was stimulated by the ideas of the English geometer 
Cayley (1821-1895). In this model, infinitely many ^^straight lines’' 
can be drawn '‘parallel” to a given line through an external point. Such 
a geometry is called Bolyai-Lobachevskian or "hyperbolic” geometry. 
(The reason for the latter name will be found on p. 226.) 

Klein’s model is constructed by first considering objects of ordinary 
Euclidean geometry and then renaming certain of these objects and the 
relations between them in such a way that a non-Euclidean geometry 
arises. This must, eo ipso, be just as consistent as the original Euclidean 
geometry, because it is presented to us, seen from another point of view 
and described with other words, as a body of facts of ordinary Euclidean 
geometry. This model can be easily understood by means of some con¬ 
cepts of projective geometry. 

If we subject the plane to a projective transformation onto another 
plane, or rather onto itself (by afterwards making the image plane 
coincide with the original plane), then, in general, a circle and its interior 
will be transformed into a conic section. But one can easily show (the 
proof is omitted here) that there exist infinitely many projective trans¬ 
formations of the plane onto itself such that a given circle plus its in¬ 
terior is transformed into itself. By such transformations points of the 
interior or of the boundary are in general shifted to other positions, but 
remain inside or on the boundary of the circle. (As a matter of fact, 
one can move the center of the circle into any other interior point.) Let 
us consider the totality of such transformations. Certainly they will 
not leave the shapes of figures invariant, and are therefore not rigid 
displacements in the usual sense. But now we take the decisive step 
of calling them "non-Euclidean displacements” in the geometry to be 
constructed. By means of these "displacements” we are able to define 
congruence—two figures being called congruent if there exists a non- 
Euclidean displacement transforming one into the other. 

The Klein model of hyperbolic geometry is then the following: The 
"plane” consists only of the points interior to the circle; points outside 
are disregarded. Each point inside the circle is called a non-Euclidean 
"point”; each chord of the circle is called a non-Euclidean "straight line”; 
"displacement” and "congruence” are defined as above; joining "points” 
and finding the intersection of "straight lines” in the non-Euclidean 
sense remain the same as in Euclidean geometry. It is an easy matter 
to show that the new system satisfies all the postulates of Euclidean 
geometry, with the one exception of the parallel postulate. That the 
parallel postulate does not hold in the new system is shown by the fact 



HYPERBOLIC NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY 


221 


that through any not on a 'Waight line'^ infinitely many 

“straight lines^^ can be drawn having no “point^^ in common with the 
given “line/' The first “straight line" is a Euclidean chord of the 
circle, while the second “straight line" may be any one of the chords 
which pass through the given “point" and do not intersect the first 
“line" inside the circle. This simple model is quite sufficient to settle 
the fundamental question which gave rise to non-Euclidean geometry; 
it proves that the parallel postulate cannot be deduced from the other 
axioms of Euclidean geometry. For if it could be so deduced, it would 
be a true theorem in the geometry of Klein's model, and we have seen 
that it is not. 

Strictly speaking, this argument is based on the assumption that the geometry 
of Klein's model is consistent, so that a theorem together with its contrary cannot 



Fig. 110. Klein’a non-Euclidean model. 



Fig. 111. Non-Euclidean distance. 


be proved. But the geometry of Klein's model is certainly as consistent as or¬ 
dinary Euclidean geometry, since statements concerning “points," “lines," etc. 
in Klein’s model are merely different ways of phrasing certain theorems of Euclid¬ 
ean geometry. A satisfactory proof of the consistency of the axioms of Euclidean 
geometry has never been given, except by referring back to the concepts of 
analytic geometry and hence ultimately to the number continuum, whose con¬ 
sistency is again an open question. 

* One detail which goes beyond the immediate objective should be men¬ 
tioned here, namely, how to define non-Euclidean “distance" in Klein's 
model. This “distance" is required to be invariant under any non- 
Euclidean “displacement"; for displacement should leave distances in¬ 
variant. We know that cross-ratios are invariant under projection. A 
cross-ratio involving two arbitrary points P and Q inside the circle pre¬ 
sents itself immediately if the segment PQ is extended to meet the 



222 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIV] 


circle in 0 and S. The cross-ratio (OSQP) of these four points is a 
(positive) number, which one might hope to take as the definition of the 
“distance” PQ between P and Q. But this definition must be modified 
slightly to make it workab le. For if the three points P, Q, R are on a 
line, it should be true that PQ + QR = PR. Now in general 
(OSQP) + (OSRQ) (OSRP). 


Instead, we have the relation 

(1) (OSQPXOSRQ) = (OSRP), 


as is seen from the equations 

(PSQPKOSRQ) = 


RO/RS 

QO/QS 


RO/RS 

PO/PS 


= {OSRP). 


In consequence of the equation (1) we can give a satisfactory additive 
definition by measuring *'distance,” not by the cross-ratio itself, but by 
the logarithm of the cross-ratio: 

PQ = non-Euclidean distance from P to Q = log (OSQP). 

This distance will be a positive number, since {OSQP) > 1 if P 9 ^ Q. 
Using the fundamental property of the logarithm (see p. 444), it follows 
from (1) that PQ + QR — PR. The base chosen for the logarithm is 
of no importance, since change of base merely changes the unit of 
measurement. Incidentally, if one of the points, e.g. Q, approaches the 
circle, then the. non-Euclidean distance PQ will increase to infinity. 
This shows that the straight line of our non-Euclidean geometry is of 
infinite non-Euclidean length, although in the ordinary Euclidean sense 
it is only a finite segment of a straight line. 


3. Geometry and Reality 

The Klein model shows that hyperbolic geometry, viewed as a formal 
deductive system, is as consistent as the classical Euclidean geometry. 
The question then arises, which of the two is to be preferred as a descrip¬ 
tion of the geometry of the physical world? As we have already seen, 
experiment can never decide whether there is but one or whether there 
are infinitely many straight lines through a point and parallel to a given 
line. In Euclidean geometry, however, the sum of the angles of any 
triangle is 180®, while it can be shown that in hyperbolic geometry the 
sum is less than 180®. Gauss accordingly performed an experiment to 
settle the question. He accurately measured the angles in a triangle 
formed by three fairly distant mountain peaks, and found the angle-sum 



GEOMETRY AND REALITY 


223 


to be 180®, within the limits of experimental error. Had the result been 
noticeably less than 180®, the consequence would have been that hyper¬ 
bolic geometry is preferable to describe physical reality. But, as it 
turned out, nothing was settled by this experiment, since for small tri¬ 
angles whose sides are only a few miles in length the deviation from 
180® in the h3q)erbolic geometry might be so small as to have been un¬ 
detectable by Gauss’s instruments. Thus, although the experiment was 
inconclusive, it showed that the Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries, 
which differ widely in the large, coincide so closely for relatively small 
figures that they are experimentally equivalent. Therefore, as long 
as purely local properties of space are under consideration, the choice 
between the two geometries is to be made solely on the basis of simplicity 
and convenience. Since the Euclidean system is rather simpler to 
deal with, we are justified in using it exclusively, as long as fairly small 
distances (of a few million miles!) are under consideration. But we 
should not necessarily expect it to be suitable for describing the universe 
as a whole, in its largest aspects. The situation here is precisely 
analogous to that which exists in physics, where the systems of Newton 
and Einstein give the same results for small distances and velocities, 
but diverge when very large magnitudes are involved. 

The revolutionary importance of the discovery of non-Euclidean 
geometry lay in the fact that it demolished the notion of the axioms 
of Euclid as the immutable mathematical framework into which our 
experimental knowledge of physical reality must be fitted. 

4. Poincare’s Model 

The mathematician is free to consider a “geometry” as defined by any 
set of consistent axioms about “points,” “straight lines,” etc.; his in¬ 
vestigations will be useful to the physicist only if these axioms corre¬ 
spond to the physical behavior of objects in the real world. From this 
point of view we wish to examine the meaning of the statement “light 
travels in a straight line.” If this is regarded as the physical definition 
of “straight line,” then the axioms of geometry must be so chosen as to 
correspond with the behavior of light rays. Let us imagine, with Poin- 
car6, a world composed of the interior of a circle <7, and such that the 
velocity of light at any point inside the circle is equal to the distance of 
that point from the circumference. It can be proved that rays of light 
will then take the form of circular arcs perpendicular at their extremities 
to the circumference C. In such a world, the geometrical properties of 
“straight lines” (defined as light rays) will differ from the Euclidean 



224 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IVl 


properties of straight lines. In particular, the parallel axiom will hot 
hold, since there will be infinitely many “straight lines” through any 
point which do not intersect a given “straight line.” As a matter of 
fact, the “points” and “straight lines” in this world will have exactly 
the geometrical properties of the “points” and “lines” of the Klein 
model. In other words, we shall have a different model of a hyper¬ 
bolic geometry. But Euclidean geometry will also apply in this world; 
instead of being non-Euclidean “straight lines,” the light rays would 
be Euclidean circles perpendicular to C. Thus we see that different 
systems of geometry can describe the same physical situation, provided 



that the physical objects (in this case, light rays) are correlated with 
different concepts of the two systems: 

light ray —» “straight line”—hyperbolic geometry 
light ray —♦ “circle”—Euclidean geometry. 

Since the concept of a straight line in Euclidean geometry corresponds 
to the behavior of a light ray in a homogeneous medium, we would 
say that the geometry of the region inside C is hyperbolic, meaning only 
that the physical properties of light rays in this world correspond to the 
properties of the “straight lines” of hyperbolic geometry. 

5. Elliptic or Riemannian Geometry 

In Euclidean geometry, as well as in the hyperbolic or Bolyai- 
Lobachevskian geometry, the tacit assumption is made that the line is 


ELLIPTIC OR RIEMANNIAN GEOMETRY 


225 


infinite (the infinite extent of the line is essentially tied up with the 
concept and the axioms of “betweenness'O- But after hyperbolic 
geometry had opened the way for freedom in constructing geometries, 
it was only natural to ask whether different non-Euclidean geometries 
could be constructed in which a straight line is not infinite but finite 
and closed. Of course, in such geometries not only the parallel pos¬ 
tulate, but also the axioms of ‘^betweenness^' will have to be abandoned. 
Modern developments have brought out the physical importance of 
these geometries. They were first considered in the inaugural address 
delivered in 1851 by Riemann upon his admission as an unpaid in¬ 
structor (“Privat-Docent") at the University of Goettingen. Geome¬ 
tries with closed finite lines can be constructed in a completely consistent 



Fig. 113. *'Straight lines” in a Riemannian geometry. 


way. Let us imagine a two-dimensional world consisting of the surface 
S of a sphere, in which we define “straight line" to mean great circle of 
the sphere. This would be the natural way to describe the world of a 
navigator, since the arcs of great circles are the curves of shortest length 
between two points on a sphere and this is a characteristic property of 
straight lines in the plane. In such a world, every two “straight lines" 
intersect, so that from an external point no line can be drawn parallel 
to (i.e. not intersecting) a given “straight line." The geometry of 
“straight lines" in this world is called an elliptic geometry. In this 
geometry, the distance between two points is measured simply by the 
distance along the shorter arc of the great circle connecting the points. 
Angles are measured as in Euclidean geometry. We generally consider 
as typical of an elliptic geometry the fact that no parallel exists to a line. 



226 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


IIV] 

Following Riemann, we can generalize this geometry as follows. Let 
us consider a world consisting of a curved surface in space, not neces' 
sarily a sphere, and let us define the “straight line” joining any two 
points to be the curve of ehorteat length or “geodesic” joining these 
points. The points of the surface can be divided into two classes:—1. 
Points in the neighborhood of which the surface is like a sphere in that 
it lies wholly on one side of the tangent plane at the point. 2. Points 
in the neighborhood of which the surface is saddle-shaped, and lies on 
both sides of the tangent plane at the point. Points of the first kind 



Fig. 114. Elliptic point. 


are called elliptic points of the surface, since, if the tangent plane is 
shifted slightly parallel to itself, it intersects the surface in an elliptical 
curve; while points of the second kind are called hyperbolic, since, 
if the tangent plane is shifted slightly parallel to itself, it intersects the 
surface in a curve resembling a hyperbola. The geometry of the geo¬ 
desic “straight lines” in the neighborhood of a point of the surface is 
elliptic or hyperbolic according as the point is an elliptic or hyperbolic 
point. In such a model of non-Euclidean geometry, angles are meas¬ 
ured by their ordinary Euclidean value. 

This idea was developed by Riemann, who considered a geometry of 



ELLIPTIC OR RIEMANNIAN GEOMETRY 


227 


space analogous to this geometry of a surface, in which the “curvature” 
of space may change the character of the geometry from point to point. 
The “straight lines” in a Riemannian geometry are the geodesics. In 
Einstein’s general theory of relativity the geometry of space is a Rie¬ 
mannian geometry, light travels along geodesics, and the curvature of 
space is determined by the nature of the matter that fills it. 

From its origin in the study of axiomatics, non-Euclidean geometry 
has developed into an exceedingly useful instrument for application to 
the physical world. In the theory of relativity, in optics, and in the 
general theory of wave propagation, a non-Euclidcan description of 
phenomena is sometimes far more adequate than a Euclidean one. 



APPENDIX 

♦GEOMETRY IN MORE THAN THREE DIMENSIONS 

1. Introduction 

The “real space” that is the medium of our physical experience has 
three dimensions, the plane has two dimensions, and the line one. Our 
spatial intuition in its ordinary sense is definitely limited to three 
dimensions. Still, on many occasions it is quite convenient to speak 
of “spaces” having four or more dimensions. What is the meaning of 
an n-dimensional space when n is greater than three, and what purposes 
can it serve? An answer can be given from the analytic as well as from 
the purely geometric point of view. The terminology of n-dimensional 


228 PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS [IV] 

space may be regarded merely as a suggestive geometric language for 
mathematical ideas that are no longer within reach of ordinary geometric 
intuition. We shall give a brief indication of the simple considerations 
that motivate and justify this language. 

2. Analytic Approach 

We have already remarked on the inversion of meaning which came 
about in the course of development of analytic geometry. Points, lines, 
curves, etc. were originally considered to be purely “geometrical” 
entities, and the task of analytic geometry was merely to assign to them 
systems of numbers or equations, and to interpret or to develop geometri¬ 
cal theory by algebraic or analytic methods. In the course of time the 
opposite point of view began increasingly to assert itself. A number x, 
or a pair of numbers x, y, or a triple of numbers x, t/, z were considered 
as the fundamental objects, and these analytic entities were then “visual¬ 
ized” as points on a line, in a plane, or in space. From this point of 
view geometrical language serves only to state relations between 
numbers. We may discard the primary or even the independent char¬ 
acter of geometrical objects by saying that a number pair x, t/ is a point 
in the plane, the set of all number pairs x, y that satisfy the linear 
equation L{x^ y) = ax + + c = 0 with fixed numbers a, 6, c is a 

line, etc. Similar definitions may be made in space of three dimensions. 

Even if we are primarily interested in an algebraic problem, it may 
be that the language of geometry lends itself to an adequate brief de¬ 
scription of it, and that geometrical intuition suggests the appropriate 
algebraic procedure. For example, if we wish to solve three simul¬ 
taneous linear equations for three unknown quantities Xj y^ z: 

L(x, y,z) = ax hy + C 2 + d =0 

L'(x, 1 /, z) = a'x + Vy + c'z + d' = 0 

L''(x, y, z) = a''x + V'y + c ''2 + d” = 0, 

we may visualize the problem as that of finding the point of intersection 
in three dimensional space Rz of the three planes defined by the equa¬ 
tions L = 0, L' = 0, L" = 0. Again, if we are considering only the 
number pairs x, y for which x > 0, we may visualize them as the half¬ 
plane to the right of the x-axis. More generally, the totality of number 
pairs X, y for which 


L(x, y) = ax + + d > 0 



ANALYTIC APPROACH 


229 


may be visualized as a half-plane on one side of the line L = 0, and the 
totality of number triples x, z for which 

L(x, 2 /, z) = ax + 52/ + cz + d > 0 
may be visualized as the ‘'half-space’^ on one side of the plane 

Vy Z) = 0 . 

The introduction of a “four-dimensional space” or even an “n-dimen- 
sional space” is now quite natural. Let us consider a quadruple of 
numbers x, y, z, t Such a quadruple is said to be represented by, or 
simply, to he a point in four-dimensional space Ri . More generally, 
a point of n-dimensional space /?„ is by definition simply an ordered set 
of n real numbers Xi, X 2 , • • • , Xn . It does not matter that we cannot 
visualize such a point. The geometrical language remains just as 
suggestive for algebraic properties involving four or n variables. The 
reason for this is that many of the algebraic properties of linear equa¬ 
tions, etc. are essentially independent of the number of variables in¬ 
volved, or, as we may say, of the dimension of the space of the 
variables. For example, we call “hyperplane” the totality of all points 
xi, X 2 , • • • , Xn in the n-dimensional space Rn which satisfy a linear 
equation 

L(Xi ^ X 2 J • • • , Xn) = aiXi + 02X2 + • • • + OnXn + 5 = 0. 

Then the fundamental algebraic problem of solving a system of n linear 
equations in n unknowns, 

Ll(Xi , X2 , • • • , Xn) = 0 
L2(Xi , X2 , • • • , Xn) = 0 


Ln{Xl , X2 , • • • , X„) =0, 

is stated in geometrical language as that of finding the point of inter 
section of the n hyperplanes Li = 0, L 2 = 0, • • • , Ln = 0. 

The advantage of this geometrical mode of expression is only that it 
emphasizes certain algebraic features which are independent of n and which 
are capable of visualization for n < 3. In many applications the use of 
such a terminology has the advantage of abbreviating, facilitating, and 
directing the intrinsically analytic considerations. The theory of rela¬ 
tivity may be mentioned as an example where important progress was 
attained by uniting the space coordinates x, 2 /, z and the time coordinate 
t of an “event” into a four-dimensional “space-time” manifold of number 




230 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


(IV) 


quadruples x, y, z, t. By the introduction of a non-Euclidean hyper¬ 
bolic geometry into this analytic framework, it became possible to de¬ 
scribe many otherwise complex situations with remarkable simplicity. 
Similar advantages have accrued in mechanics and statistical physics, 
as well as in purely mathematical fields. 

Here are some examples from mathematics. The totality of all circles 
in the plane forms a three-dimensional manifold, because a circle with 
center x, y and radius t can be represented by a point with the co¬ 
ordinates X, y, t. Since the radius of a circle is a positive number, the 
totality of points representing circles fills out a half-space. In the 
same way, the totality of all spheres in ordinary three-dimensional space 
forms a four-dimensional manifold, since each sphere with center 
X, y, z and radius t can be represented by a point with coordinates 
X, y, z, t. A cube in three-dimensional space with edge of length 2, 
sides parallel to the coordinate planes, and center at the origin, consists 
of the totality of all points Xi, xj, xj for which 1 xi | < 1, | xj | < 1, 

I Xs 1 < 1. In the same way a “cube” in n-dimensional space Rn with 
edge 2, sides parallel to the coordinate planes, and center at the origin, 
is defined as the totality of points ii, xj,. • •, x# for which simultane¬ 
ously 

I Xi 1 < 1, I xj I < 1, ..., I x„ I < 1. 

The “surface” of this cube consists of all points for which at least one 
equality sign holds. The surface elements of dimension n — 2 consist 
of those points where at least two equality signs hold, etc. 

Exercite: Describe the surface of such a cube in the three-, four-, and n-dimen¬ 
sional cases. 


*3. Geometrical or Combinatorial Approach 

While the analytical approach to n-dimensional geometry is simple and 
well adapted to most applications, there is another method of procedure 
which is purely geometrical in character. It is based on a reduction from 
n- to (n — l)-dimensional data that enables us to define geometry in 
higher dimensions by a process of mathematical induction. 

Let us start with the boundary of a triangle ABC in two dimensions. 
By cutting the closed polygon at the point C and then rotating AC and 
BC into the line AB we obtain the simple straight figure of Figure 116 
in which the point C appears twice. This one-dimensional figure gives 



GEOMETRICAL OR COMBINATORIAL APPROACH 


231 


a complete representation of the boundary of the two dimensional 
triangle. By bending the segments AC and BC together in a plane, we 
can make the two points C coincide again. But, and this is the im¬ 
portant point, we need not do this bending. We need only agree to 
“identify,” i.e. not to distinguish between, the two points C in Figure 
116, even though they do not actually coincide as geometrical entities 
in the naive sense. We may even go a step farther by taking the three 
segments apart at the points A and B, obtaining a set of three segments 
CA, AB, BC which can be put together again to form a “real” triangle 
by making the identified pairs of points coincide. This idea of identi¬ 
fying different points in a set of segments to form a polygon (in this 
case a triangle) is sometimes very practical. If we wish to ship a 



0- —.— . -■ ■ - -- o 

A B 


B C 

o , - — o 

C A 

Fig. 116. Triangle defined by segment# with oofirdinated ends. 


complicated framework of steel bars, such as the framework of a bridge, 
we ship it in single bars and mark by the same symbol those endpoints 
which are to be connected when the framework is put together in space. 
The system of bars with marked endpoints is a complete equivalent of 
the spatial framework. This remark suggests the way to reduce a two- 
dimensional polyhedron in three-dimensional space to figures of lower 
dimensions. Let us take, for example, the surface of a cube (Fig. 117). 
It can be immediately reduced to a system of six plane squares whose 
boundary segments are appropriately identified, and in another step to 
a system of 12 straight segments with their endpoints properly identified. 

In general, any polyhedron in three-dimensional space Rt can be re¬ 
duced in this way either to a system of plane polygons, or to a system 
of straight segments. 



232 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


[IV] 


Exercite: Carry out this reduction for all the regular polyhedra (see p. 237). 

It is now quite clear that we can invert our reasoning, defining a 
polygon in the plane by a system of straight segments, and a polyhedron 
in ^3 by a system of polygons in Rt or again, with a further reduction, 
by a system of straight segments. Hence it is natural to define a 
“polyhedron” in four-dimensional space Rt by a system of polyhedra 
in I ?3 with proper identification of their two-dimensional faces; polyhedra 
in Rt by systems of polyhedra in Rt , and so on. Ultimately we can 
reduce every polyhedron in Rn to a sj'stem of straight segments. 


Vs — n 





8 

4 

3 

7 

8 

n 

I 

in 

IV 

5 

b_ 

_2 

6 

5 


4 3 

I 

1 2 

► ( 

8 4' 

n 

5 V 

1 ' 

3 7 

m 

2 6 

I I 



7 8 


5 6 


8 7 

IV 


y 


m 

6 5 

► ( 

1 2 


4 3 


10 - 


-0 5 30- 


20 - 


-o6 40- 


lo- 


-o 4 50 - 


30- 


-0 4 8o- 


30 - 


10 - 


-o2 70- 
-02 50- 


Fig. 117. Cube defined by oodrdination of verticee and edgee. 


■07 

■08 

-08 

■07 

06 

■06 


It is not possible here to develop this subject much further. Only a 
few remarks without proof may be added. A cube in Rt is bounded 
by 8 three-dimensional cubes, each identified with a “neighbor” along 
a two-dimensional face. The cube in Rt has 16 vertices, in each of 
which four of the 32 straight edges meet. In Rt there are six regular 
polyhedra. Besides the “cube” there is one bounded by 5 regular 
tetrahedra, one bounded by 16 tetrahedra, one bounded by 24 octahedra, 
one bounded by 120 dodecahedra, and one bounded by 600 tetrahedra. 
For n > 4 dimensions it has been proved that only 3 regular polyhedra 





GEOMETRICAL OR COMBINATORIAL APPROACH 


233 


are possible: one with n + 1 vertices bounded by n + 1 polyhedra in 
Rn-i with n sides of (n — 2) dimensions; one with 2" vertices bounded 
by 2n polyhedra in Rn-i with 2n — 2 sides; and one with 2n vertices and 
2" polyhedra of n sides in Rn-i as boundaries. 

* Exercise: Compare the definition of the cube in Ra given in Article 2 with the 
definition given in this article, and show that the ^'analytical'' definition of the 
surface of the cube of Article 2 is equivalent to the “combinatorial" definition 
of this article. 

From the structural, or “combinatorial,” point of view, the simplest 
geometrical figures of dimension 0, I, 2, 3 are the point, the segment, 
the triangle, and the tetrahedron, respectively. In the interests of a 
uniform notation let us denote these figures by the symbols To, Ti, 



Fig. 118. The simplest elements in 1, 2,3, 4 dimensions. 


Tt, T», respectively. (The subscripts denote the dimension.) The 
structure of each of these figures is described by the statement that 
each T„ contains n + 1 vertices and that each subset of i + 1 vertices 
of a r„ (t = 0, 1, • • • , n) determines a Ti. For example, the three- 
dimensional tetrahedron Ts contains 4 vertices, 6 segments, and 4 
triangles. 

It is clear how to proceed. We define a four-dimensional “tetrahe¬ 
dron” T4 as a set of five vertices such that each subset of four vertices 
determines a T,, each subset of three vertices determines a T,, etc. 
The schematic diagram of Ti is shown in Figure 118. We see that Ti 
contains 5 vertices, 10 segments, 10 triangles, and 5 tetrahedra. 

The generalization to n dimensions is immediate. From the theory 

r ^ ^ 

of combinations it is known that there are exactly = -tt, - 

il(r — 



234 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. AXIOMATICS 


tIV] 


different subsets of i objects each that can be formed from a given set 
of r objects. Hence an n-dimensional “tetrahedron” contains 

vertices (To’s), 

segments (Ti’s), 

triangles (Tj’b), 

T,>b, 

C:X[ = 1 Tn's. 

Exercise: Draw a diagram of Tg and determine the number of different Ti*B it 
contains, for % — 0, 1, •••,6. 


» n + 1 

— (n + 1)1 
2I(n-l)l 
(n + 1)1 
* 31(n - 2)1 

^n+l (n+ 1)1 
^ 4!(n - 3)1 




CHAPTER V 


TOPOLOGY 

INTRODUCTION 

In the middle of the nineteenth century there began a completely new 
development in geometry that was soon to become one of the great 
forces in modern mathematics. The new subject, called analysis situs 
or topology, has as its object the study of the properties of geometrical 
figures that persist even when the figures are subjected to deformations 
so drastic that all their metric and projective properties are lost. 

One of the great geometers of the time was A. F. Moebius (1790-1868), 
a man whose lack of self-assertion destined him to the career of an 
insignificant astronomer in a second-rate German observatory. At the 
age of sixty-eight he submitted to the Paris Academy a memoir on 
‘‘one-sided^^ surfaces that contained some of the most surprising facts of 
this new kind of geometry. Like other important contributions before 
it, his paper lay buried for years in the files of the Academy until it was 
eventually made public by the author. Independently of Moebius, the 
astronomer J. B, Listing (1808-1882) in Goettingen had made similar 
discoveries, and at the suggestion of Gauss had published in 1847 a little 
book, Vorstudien zur Topologie, When Bernhard Riemann (1826-1866) 
came to Goettingen as a student, he found the mathematical atmosphere 
of that university town filled with keen interest in these strange new 
geometrical ideas. Soon he realized that here was the key to the under¬ 
standing of the deepest properties of analytic functions of a complex 
variable. Nothing, perhaps, has given more impetus to the later de¬ 
velopment of topology than the great structure of Riemann’s theory of 
functions, in which topological concepts are absolutely fundamental. 

At first, the novelty of the methods in the new field left mathemati¬ 
cians no time to present their results in the traditional postulational 
form of elementary geometry. Instead, the pioneers, such as Poincar6, 
were forced to rely largely upon geometrical intuition. Even today a 
student of topology will find that by too much insistence on a rigorous 
form of presentation he may easily lose sight of the essential geometrical 
content in a mass of formal detail. Still, it is a great merit of recent 

235 



236 TOPOLOGY IV ] 

work to have brought topology within the framework of rigorous mathe¬ 
matics, where intuition remains the source but not the final validation 
of truth. During this process, started by L. E. J. Brouwer, the sig¬ 
nificance of topology for almost the whole of mathematics has steadily 
increased. American mathematicians, in particular 0. Veblen, J. W. 
Alexander, and S. Lefschetz, have made important contributions to the 
subject. 

While topology is definitely a creation of the last hundred years, there 
were a few isolated earlier discoveries that later found their place in 
the modern systematic development. By far the most important of 
these is a formula, relating the numbers of vertices, edges, and faces 
of a simple polyhedron, observed as early as 1640 by Descartes, and 
rediscovered and used by Euler in 1752. The typical character of this 
relation as a topological theorem became apparent much later, after 
Poincar6 had recognized '^Euler^s formula^^ and its generalizations as 
one of the central theorems of topology. So, for reasons both historical 
and intrinsic, we shall begin our discussion of topology with Euler^s 
formula. Since the ideal of perfect rigor is neither necessary nor de¬ 
sirable during one^s first steps in an unfamiliar field, we shall not hesitate 
from time to time to appeal to the reader^s geometrical intuition. 

§1. EULER^S FORMULA FOR POLYHEDRA 

Although the study of polyhedra held a central place in Greek geome¬ 
try, it remained for Descartes and Euler to discover the following fact: 
In a simple polyhedron let V denote the number of vertices, E the 
number of edges, and F the number of faces; then always 

(1) V - E + F == 2. 

By a polyhedron is meant a solid whose surface consists of a number of 
polygonal faces. In the case of the regular solids, all the polygons are 
congruent and all the angles at vertices are equal. A polyhedron is 
simple if there are no ‘‘holes^^ in it, so that its surface can be deformed 
continuously into the surface of a sphere. Figure 120 shows a simple 
polyhedron which is not regular, while Figure 121 shows a polyhedron 
which is not simple. 

The reader should check the fact that Euler's formula holds for the 
simple polyhedra of Figures 119 and 120, but does not hold for the 
polyhedron of Figure 121. 

To prove Euler's formula, let us imagine the given simple polyhedron 
to be hollow, with a surface made of thin rubber. Then if we cut out 



EULER’S FORMULA FOR POLYHEDRA 


237 


one of the faces of the hollow polyhedron, we can deform the remaining 
surface until it stretches out flat on a plane. Of course, the areas of the 


1 






Fig. 119. The regular polyhedra. 


faces and the angles between the edges of the polyhedron will have 
changed in this process. But the network of vertices and edges in the 
plane will contain the same number of vertices and edges as did the 























EULER’S FORMULA FOR POLYHEDRA 


239 


original polyhedron, while the number of polygons will be one less than 
in the original polyhedron, since one face was removed. We shall now 
show that for the plane network, F — iB7 + F=l,so that, if the removed 
face is coimted, the result isF — JS? + ^’==2for the original polyhedron. 

First we triangulate” the plane network in the following way: In 
some polygon of the network which is not already a triangle we draw a 
diagonal. The effect of this is to increase both E and F by 1, thus 
preserving the value of F — F + F. We continue drawing diagonals 
joining pairs of points (Fig. 122) until the figure consists entirely of 
triangles, as it must eventually. In the triangulated network, 
F — F + F has the value that it had before the division into tri- 








/ 

\ ' 
\ 

B / 

/ 

[ 

\ 

\ 

/ 

\ 

\ 

/ 

\ 

) 

/ 

\ 






angles, since the drawing of diagonals has not changed it. Some of the 
triangles have edges on the boundary of the plane netw^ork. Of these 
some, such as ABC^ have only one edge on the boundary, while other 
triangles may have two edges on the boundary. We take any boundary 
triangle and remove that part of it which does not also belong to some 
other triangle. Thus, from ABC we remove the edge AC and the face, 
leaving the vertices A, B, C and the two edges AB and BC\ while from 
DEF we remove the face, the two edges DF and FF, and the vertex F. 
The removal of a triangle of type ABC decreases F and F by 1, while F 
is unaffected, so that F — F + F remains the same. The removal of a 
triangle of type DEF decreases F by 1, F by 2, and F by 1, so that 
F — F + F again remains the same. By a properly chosen sequence of 
these operations we can remove triangles with edges on the boundary 
(which changes with each removal), until finally only one triangle 
remains, with its three edges, three vertices, and one face. For this 






240 


TOPOLOGY 


[V] 


simple network, V — iS7 + F = 3 — 3 + 1 = 1. But we have seen 
that by constantly erasing triangles V — E + F was not altered. 
Therefore in the original plane network V — E + F must equal 1 also, 
and thus equals 1 for the polyhedron with one face missing. We 
conclude that 7 — .B + F = 2 for the complete polyhedron. This 
completes the proof of Euler’s formula. (See (56), (57), pp. 496-7.) 

On the basis of Euler’s formula it is easy to show that there are no more than 
five regular polyhedra. For suppose that a regular polyhedron has F faces, each 
of which is an n-sided regular polygon, and that r edges meet at each vertex. 
Cc unting edges by faces and vertices, we see that 

(2) nF = 2E; 

for each edge belongs to two faces, and hence is counted twice in the product nF ; 
moreover, 

( 3 ) rV = 2E, 

since each edge has two vertices. Hence from (1) we obtain the equation 

2E 2E „ ^ 

-1- E =» 2 

n r 


We know to begin with that n > 3 and r > 3, since a polygon must have at least 
three sides, and at least three sides must meet at each polyhedral angle. But 
n and r cannot both be greater than three, for then the left hand side of equation 
(4) could not exceed §, which is impossible for any positive value of E, There¬ 
fore, let us see what values r may have when n = 3, and what values n may have 
when r « 3. The totality of polyhedra given by these two cases gives the number 
of possible regular polyhedra. 

For n -* 3, equation (4) becomes 

1 ^ J. 

r 6 “b' 

r can thus equal 3, 4, or 5. (6, or any greater number, is obviously excluded, 

since \/E is always positive.) For these values of n and r we get F = 6, 12, or 30, 
corresponding respectively to the tetrahedron, octahedron, and icosahedron. 
Likewise, for r « 3 we obtain the equation 

1 ^ - i 

n 6 “ 


from which it follows that n « 3, 4, or 5, and E - 12, or 30, respectively. These 

values correspond respectively to the tetrahedron, cube, and dodecahedron. 
Substituting these values for n, r, and E in equations (2) and (3), we obtain the 
numbers of vertices and faces in the corresponding polyhedra. 



TOPOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 


241 


§2. TOPOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF FIGURES 

L Topological Properties 

We have proved that the Euler formula holds for any simple polyhe¬ 
dron. But the range of validity of this formula goes far beyond the 
polyhedra of elementary geometry, with their flat faces and straight 
edges; the proof just given would apply equally well to a simple polyhe¬ 
dron with curved faces and edges, or to any subdivision of the surface 
of a sphere into regions bounded by curved arcs. Moreover, if we 
imagine the surface of the polyhedron or of the sphere to be made out 
of a thin sheet of rubber, the Euler formula will still hold if the surface 
is deformed by bending and stretching the rubber into any other shape, 
so long as the rubber is not torn in the process. For the formula is 
concerned only with the numbers of the vertices, edges, and faces, and 
not with lengths, areas, straightness, cross-ratios, or any of the usual 
concepts of elementary or projective geometry. 

We recall that elementary geometry deals with the magnitudes 
(length, angle, and area) that arc unchanged by the rigid motions, 
while projective geometry deals with the concepts (point, line, incidence, 
and cross-ratio) which are unchanged by the still larger group of projec¬ 
tive transformations. But the rigid motions and the projections are 
both very special cases of what are called topological transformations: 
a topological transformation of one geometrical figure A into another 
figure A' is given by any correspondence 

p <r^ p' 

between the points p of A and the points p' of A' which has the follow¬ 
ing two properties: 

1 . The correspondence is hiunique. This means that to each point 
p of A corresponds just one point p' of A', and conversely. 

2 . The correspondence is continuous in both directions. This means 
that if we take any two points p, g of A and move p so that the distance 
between it and q approaches zero, then the distance between the cor¬ 
responding points p', g' of A' will also approach zero, and conversely. 

Any property of a geometrical figure A that holds as well for every 
figure into which A may be transformed by a topological transformation 
is called a topological property of A, and topology is the branch of geometry 
which deals only with the topological properties of figures. Imagine a 
figure to be copied “free-hand^^ by a conscientious but inexpert drafts¬ 
man who makes straight lines curved and alters angles, distances and 
areas; then, although the metric and projective properties of the original 
figure would be lost, its topological properties would remain the same. 



242 


TOPOLOGY 


IVl 


The most intuitive examples of general topological transformations 
are the deformations. Imagine a figure such as a sphere or a triangle 
to be made from or drawn upon a thin sheet of rubber, which is then 
stretched and twisted in any manner without tearing it and without 
bringing distinct points into actual coincidence. (Bringing distinct 
points into coincidence would violate condition 1. Tearing the sheet 
of rubber would violate condition 2, since two points of the original 
figure which tend toward coincidence from opposite sides of a line along 
which the sheet is torn would not tend towards coincidence in the torn 
figure.) The final position of the figure will then be a topological image 
of the original. A triangle can be deformed into any other triangle or 



Fig. 123. Topologically equivalent surfacee. 




Fig. 124. Topologically non-equivalent surfaces. 


into a circle or an ellipse, and hence these figures have exactly the same 
topological properties. But one cannot deform a circle into a line seg¬ 
ment, nor the surface of a sphere into the surface of an inner tube. 

The general concept of topological transformation is wider than the 
concept of deformation. For example, if a figure is cut during a de¬ 
formation and the edges of the cut sewn together after the deformation 
in exactly the same way as before, the process still defines a topological 
transformation of the original figure, although it is not a deformation. 
Thus the two curves of Figure 134 (p. 256) are topologically equivalent 
to each other or to a circle, since they may be cut, untwisted, and the 
cut sewn up. But it is impossible to deform one curve into the other 
or into a circle without first cutting the curve. 

Topological properties of figures (such as are given by Euler’s theorem 
and others to be discussed in this section) are of the greatest interest 



TOPOLOGICAL PROPERTIES 


243 


and importance in many mathematical investigations. They are in a 
sense the deepest and most fundamental of all geometrical properties, 
since they persist under the most drastic changes of shape. 

2. Connectivity 

As another example of two figures that are not topologically equiva¬ 
lent we may consider the plane domains of Figure 125. The first of 



Fig. 125. Simple and double connectivity. 




Fig. 126. Cutting a doubly connected domain to make it simply connected. 


these consists of all points interior to a circle, while the second consists 
of all points contained between two concentric circles. Any closed 
curve lying in the domain a can,be continuously deformed or “shrunk” 
down to a single point within the domain. A domain with this property 
is said to be simply connected. The domain f> is not simply connected. 
For example, a circle concentric with the two boundary circles and mid- 


244 


TOPOLOGY 


IVl 


way k>etween them cannot be shrunk to a single point within the domain, 
since during this process the curve would necessarily pass over the center 
of the circles, which is not a point of the domain. A domain which is 
not simply connected is said to be multiply connected. If the multiply 
connected domain h is cut along a radius, as in Figure 126, the resulting 
domain is simply connected. 

More generally, we can construct domains with two, three, or more 
‘‘holes,” such as the domain of Figure 127. In order to convert this 
domain into a simpl^^ connected domain, two cuts are necessary. If 



n — \ non-intersecting cuts from boundary to boundary are needed to 
convert a given multiply connected domain D into a simply connected 
domain, the domain D is said to be n-tuply connected. The degree of 
connectivity of a domain in the plane is an important topological 
invariant of the domain. 

§3. OTHER EXAMPLES OF TOPOLOGICAL THEOREMS 

1. The Jordan Curve Theorem 

A simple closed curve (one that does not intersect itself) is drawn 
in the plane. What property of this figure persists even if the plane is 
regarded as a sheet of rubber that can be deformed in any way? The 


THE JORDAN CURVE THEOREM 


245 


length of the curve and the area that it encloses can be changed by a 
deformation. But there is a topological property of the configuration 
which is so simple that it may seem trivial: A simple closed curve C in 
the plane divides the plane into exactly two domains, an inside and an 
outside. By this is meant that the points of the plane fall into two 
classes— A, the outside of the curve, and B, the inside—such that any 
pair of points of the same class can be joined by a curve which does not 
cross C, while any curve joining a pair of points belonging to different 
classes must cross C. This statement is obviously true for a circle or 
an ellipse, but the self-evidence fades a little if one contemplates a 
complicated curve like the twisted polygon in Figure 128. 



Fig, 128. Which points of the plane are inside this polygon? 


This theorem was first stated by Camille Jordan (1838-1922) in his 
famous Cours d’Analyse, from which a whole generation of mathema¬ 
ticians learned the modern concept of rigor in analysis. Strangely 
enough, the proof given by Jordan was neither short nor simple, and 
the surprise was even greater when it turned out that Jordan’s proof 
was invalid and that considerable effort was necessary to fill the gaps in 
his reasoning. The first rigorous proofs of the theorem were quite 
complicated and hard to understand, even for many well-trained mathe¬ 
maticians. Only recently have comparatively simple proofs been 
found. One reason for the difficulty lies in the generality of the concept 
of “simple closed curve,” which is not restricted to the class of polygons 
or “smooth” curves, but includes all curves which are topological 



246 


TOPOLOGY 


[V] 


images of a circle. On the other hand, many concepts such as ‘‘inside, 
“outside,” etc., which are so clear to the intuition, must be made precise 
before a rigorous proof is possible. It is of the highest theoretical im¬ 
portance to analyze such concepts in their fullest generality, and much 
of modem topology is devoted to this task. But one should never 
forget that in the great majority of cases that arise from the study of 
concrete geometrical phenomena it is quite beside the point to work 
with concepts whose extreme generality creates unnecessary difficulties. 
As a matter of fact, the Jordan curve theorem is quite simple to prove 
for the reasonably well-behaved curves, such as polygons or curves with 
continuously turning tangents, which occur in most important problems. 
We shall prove the theorem for polygons in the appendix to this chapter. 

2. The Four Color Problem 

From the example of the Jordan curve theorem one might suppose 
that topology is concerned with providing rigorous proofs for the sort 
of obvious assertions that no sane person would doubt. On the con¬ 
trary, there are many topological questions, some of them quite simple 
in form, to which the intuition gives no satisfactory answer. An example 
of this kind is the renowned “four color problem.” 



Fig. 129. Coloring a map. 


In coloring a geographical map it is customary to give different colors 
to any two countries that have a portion of their boundary in common. 
It has been found empirically that any map, no matter how many 
countries it contains nor how they are situated, can be so colored by 
using only four different colors. It is easy to see that no smaller number 
of colors will suffice for all cases. Figure 129 shows an island in the sea 



THE FOUR COLOR PROBLEM 


247 


that certainly cannot be properly colored with less than four colors, 
since it contains four countries, each of which touches the other three. 

The fact that no map has yet been found whose coloring requires 
more than four colors suggests the following mathematical theorem: 
For any subdivision of the plane into non-overlapping regions^ it is always 
possible to mark the regions with one of the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 in such a way 
that no two adjacent regions receive the same number. By ‘‘adjacent^' 
regions we mean regions with a whole segment of boundary in common; 
two regions which meet at a single point only or at a finite number of 
points (such as the states of Colorado and Arizona) will not be called 
adjacent, since no confusion would arise if they were colored with the 
same color. 

The problem of proving this theorem seems to have been first pro¬ 
posed by Moebius in 1840, later by DeMorgan in 1850, and again by 
Cayley in 1878. A ^^proof'^ was published by Kempe in 1879, but in 
1890 Heawood found an error in Kempe's reasoning. By a revision of 
Kempe's proof, Heawood was able to show that five colors are always 
sufficient. (A proof of the five color theorem is given in the appendix 
to this chapter.) Despite the efforts of many famous mathematicians, 
the matter essentially rests with this more modest result: It has been 
proved that five colors suffice for all maps and it is conjectured that four 
will likewise suffice. But, as in the case of the famous Fermat theorem 
(see p. 42), neither a proof of this conjecture nor an example contra¬ 
dicting it has been produced, and it remains one of the great unsolved 
problems in mathematics. The four color theorem has indeed been 
proved for all maps containing less than thirty-eight regions. In view 
of this fact it appears that even if the general theorem is false it cannot 
be disproved by any very simple example. 

In the four color problem the maps may be drawn either in the plane 
or on the surface of a sphere. The two cases are equivalent: any map 
on the sphere may be represented on the plane by boring a small hole 
through the interior of one of the regions A and deforming the resulting 
surface until it is flat, as in the proof of Euler^s theorem. The resulting 
map in the plane will be that of an ‘‘island^' consisting of the remaining 
regions, surrounded by a ‘*sea’' consisting of the region A. Conversely, 
by a reversal of this process, any map in the plane may be represented 
on the sphere. We may therefore confine ourselves to maps on the 
sphere. Furthermore, since deformations of the regions and their 
boundary lines do not affect the problem, we may suppose that the 
boundary of each region is a simple closed polygon composed of circular 
arcs. Even thus *'regularized,” the problem remains unsolved; the 



248 


TOPOLOGY 


IVl 


difficulties here, unlike those involved in the Jordan curve theorem, do 
not reside in the generality of the concepts of region and curve. 

A remarkable fact connected with the four color problem is that for 
surfaces more complicated than the plane or the sphere the correspond¬ 
ing theorems have actually been proved, so that, paradoxically enough, 
the analysis of more complicated geometrical surfaces appears in this 
respect to be easier than that of the simplest cases. For example, on 
the surface of a torus (see Figure 123), whose shape is that of a doughnut 
or an inflated inner tube, it has been shown that any map may be colored 
by using seven colors, while maps may be constructed containing seven 
regions, each of which touches the other six. 

*3. The Concept of Dimension 

The concept of dimension presents no great difficulty so long as one deals only 
with simple geometric figures such as points, lines, triangles, and polyhedra. A 
single point or any finite set of points has dimension zero, a line segment is one¬ 
dimensional, and the surface of a triangle or of a sphere two-dimensional. The 
set of points in a solid cube is three-dimensional. But when one attempts to 
extend this concept to more general point sets, the need for a precise definition 
arises. What dimension should be assigned to the point set R consisting of all 
points on the ar-axis whose coordinates are rational numbers? The set of rational 
points is dense on the line and might therefore be considered to be one¬ 
dimensional, like the line itself. On the other hand, there are irrational gaps 
between any pair of rational points, as between any two points of a finite point 
set, so that the dimension of the set R might also be considered to be zero. 

An even more knotty problem arises if one tries to assign a dimension to the 
following curious point set, first considered by Cantor. From the unit segment 
remove the middle third, consisting of all points x such that 1/3 < x < 2/3. 
Call the remaining set of points C\ . Now from C\ remove the middle third of 
each of its two segments, leaving a set which we call C*. Repeat this process by 
removing the middle third of each of the four intervals of C %, leaving a set C %, 


UM tty ........... ■ UU—»»U U - UU 


Fig. 130. Cantor’s point net. 




THE CONCEPT OF DIMENSION 


249 


and proceed in this manner to form sets C4, C*, Ce, • • • . Denote by C the set 
of points on the unit segment that are left after all these intervals have been 
removed, i.e. C is the set of points common to the infinite sequence of sets 
Cl , C2, • • • . Since one interval, of length 1/3, was removed at the first step; 
two intervals, each of length 1/3*, at the second step; etc.; the total length of the 
segments removed is 


1 .- + 2 - + 2 >-- + 

3 3» 3* 




The infinite series in parentheses is a geometrical series whose sum is 
1/(1 — 2/3) « 3; hence the total length of the segments removed is 1. Still there 
remain points in the set C. Such, for example, are the points 1/3, 2/3, 1/9, 2/9, 
7/9, 8/9, • • • , by which the successive segments are trisected. As a matter of 
fact, it is easy to show that C will consist precisely of all those points z whose 
expansions in the form of infinite triadic fractions can be written in the form 


z 


3 3* 3* 3^^ 


where each a, is either 0 or 2, while the triadic expansion of every point removed 
will have at least one of the numbers ai equal to 1. 

What shall be the dimension of the set C? The diagonal process used to prove 
the non-denumerability of the set of all real numbers can be so modified as to 
yield the same result for the set C. It would seem, therefore, that the set C 
should be one-dirnensionaK Yet C contains no complete interval, no matter how 
small, so that C might also be thought of as zero-dimensional, like a finite set of 
points. In the same spirit, we might ask whether the set of points of the plane, 
obtained by erecting at each rational point or at each point of the Cantor set C 
a segment of unit length, should be considered to be one-dimensional or two- 
dimensional. 

It was Poincar6 who (in 1912) first called attention to the need for a deeper 
analysis and a precise definition of the concept of dimensionality. Poincar6 
observed that the line is one-dimensional because we may separate any tw'o points 
on it by cutting it at a single point (which is of dimension 0), while the plane is 
two-dimensional because in order to separate a pair of points in the plane we must 
cut out a whole closed curve (of dimension 1). This suggests the inductive 
nature of dimensionality: a space is n-dimensional if any two points may be 
separated by removing an (n — l)-dimensional subset, and if a lower-dimensional 
subset will not always suffice. An inductive definition of dimensionality is also 
contained implicitly in Euclid’s Elements, where a one-dimensional figure is some¬ 
thing whose boundary consists of points, a two-dimensional figure one whose 
boundary consists of curves, and a three-dimensional figure one whose boundary 
consists of surfaces. 

In recent years an extensive theory of dimension has been developed. One 
definition of dimension begins by making precise the concept ^^point set of di¬ 
mension 0.” Any finite set of points has the property that each point of the set 
can be enclosed in a region of space which can be made as small as we please, and 
which contains no points of the set on its boundary. This property is now taken 
as the definition of 0-dimensionality. For convenience, we say that an empty 



250 


TOPOLOGY 


tvi 


set, containing no points at all, has dimension --1. Then a point set S is of di¬ 
mension 0 if it is not of dimension —1 (i.e. if S contains at least one point), and if 
each point of S can be enclosed within an arbitrarily small region whose boundary 
intersects 5 in a set of dimension —1 (i.e. whose boundary contains no points of S), 
For example, the set of rational points on the line is of dimension 0, since each 
rational point can be made the center of an arbitrarily small interval with irra¬ 
tional endpoints. The Cantor set C is also seen to be of dimension 0, since, like 
the set of rational points, it is formed by removing a dense set of points from 
the line. 

So far we have defined only the concepts of dimension —1 and dimension 0. 
The definition of dimension 1 suggests itself at once: a set S of points is of di¬ 
mension 1 if it is not of dimension —1 or 0, and if each point of S can be enclosed 
within an arbitrarily small region whose boundary intersects ^ in a set of dimen¬ 
sion 0. A line segment has this property, since the boundary of any interval is 
a pair of points, which is a set of dimension 0 according to the preceding definition. 
Moreover, by proceeding in the same manner, we can successively define the con¬ 
cepts of dimension 2, 3, 4, 6, • • • , each resting on the previous definitions. Thus 
a set S will be of dimension n if it is not of any lower dimension, and if each point 
of S can be enclosed within an arbitrarily small region whose boundary intersects 
S in a set of dimension n — 1. For example, the plane is of dimension 2, since 
each point of the plane can be enclosed within an arbitrarily small circle, whose 
circumference is of dimension l.t No point set in ordinary space can have dimen¬ 
sion higher than 3, since each point of space can be made the center of an arbi¬ 
trarily small sphere whose surface is of dimension 2. But in modern mathematics 
the word ^*space” is used to denote any system of objects for which a notion of 
‘distance” or ‘‘neighborhood** is defined (see p. 316), and these abstract “spaces** 
may have dimensions higher than 3. A simple example is Cartesian u-spacst 
whoso “points’* are ordered arrays of n real numbers: 

P ^ (Xi f X2 , x$ , f Xn), 

Q - (yi, yi, i/i» ••• , Vn); 

with the “distance** between the points P and Q defined as 

d(P, Q) ^ \/(xi - yi)* + (xi - yi)^ + • • • + (xn - y«)*. 

This space may be shown to have dimension n. A space which does not have 
dimension n for any integer n is said to be of dimension infinity. Many examples 
of such spaces are known. 

One of the most interesting facts of dimension theory is the following char¬ 
acteristic property of two-, three- or, in general, n-dimensional figures. Consider 
first the two-dimensional case. If any simple two-dimensional figure is sub¬ 
divided into sufficiently small regions (each of which is regarded as including its 

t This does not purport to be a rigorous proof that the plane is of dimension 2 
according to our definition, since it assumes that the circumference of a circle is 
known to be of dimension 1, and that the plane is known not to be of dimension 
0 or 1. But a proof can be given for these facts and for their analogs in higher 
dimensions. This proof shows that the definition of the dimension of a general 
point set does not contradict ordinary usage for simple sets. 




THE CONCEPT OF DIMENSION 


261 


boundary), then there will necessarily be points where three or more of these 
regions meet, no matter what the shapes of the regions. In addition, there will exist 
subdivisions of the figure in which each point belongs to at most three regions of 
the subdivision. Thus, if the two-dimensional figure is a square, as in Figure 131, 
then a point will belong to the three regions, 1,2, and 3, while for this particular 
subdivision no point belongs to more than three regions. Similarly, in the three- 
dimensional case it may be proved that, if a volume is covered by sufficiently 
small volumes, there always exist points common to at least four of the latter, 
while for a properly chosen subdivision no more than four will have a point in 
common. 



Fi«. 131. Th« tiling theorem. 


These observations suggest the following theorem, due to Lebesgue and 
Brouwer: If an n-dimensional figure is covered in any way by sufficiently small 
subregions, then there will exist points which belong to at least n -b 1 of these 
subregions; moreover, it is always possible to find a covering by arbitrarily small 
regions for which no point will belong to more than n -f 1 regions. Because of 
the method of covering considered here, this is known as the *‘tiling’* theorem. 
It characterizes the dimension of any geometrical figure: those figures for which 
the theorem holds are n-dimensional, while all others are of some other dimen¬ 
sion. For this reason it may be taken as the definition of dimensionality, as is 
done by some authors. 

The dimension of any set is a topological feature of the set; no two figures of 
different dimensions can be topologically equivalent. This is the famous topolo¬ 
gical theorem of “invariance of dimensionality,” which gains in significance by 
comparison with the fact stated on page 85, that the set of points in a square has 
the same cardinal number as the set of points on a line segment. The correspond¬ 
ence there defined is not topological because the continuity conditions are 
violated. 


♦4. A Fixed Point Theorem 

In the applications of topology to other branches of mathematics, 
‘‘fixed point’^ theorems play an important r61e. A typical example is 
the following theorem of Brouwer. It is much less obvious to the in¬ 
tuition than most topological facts. 





262 


TOPOLOGY 


(VI 


We consider a circular disk in the plane. By this we mean the region 
consisting of the interior of some circle, together with its circumference. 
Let us suppose that the points of this disk are subjected to any continu¬ 
ous transformation (which need not even be biunique) in which each 
point remains within the circle, although differently situated. For 
example, a thin rubber disk might be shrunk, turned, folded, stretched, 
or deformed in any way, so long as the final position of each point of 
the disk lies within its original circumference. Again, if the liquid in a 
glass is set into motion by stirring it in such a manner that particles on 
the surface remain on the surface but move around on it to other posi¬ 
tions, then at any given instant the position of the particles on the 
surface defines a continuous transformation of the original distribution 
of the particles. The theorem of Brouwer now states: Each such trans¬ 
formation leaves at least one point fixed; that is, there exists at least one 
point whose position after the transformation is the same as its original 
position. (In the example of the surface of the liquid, the fixed point 
will in general change with the time, although for a simple circular 
rotation it is the center that is always fixed.) The proof of the existence 
of a fixed point is typical of the reasoning used to establish many topo¬ 
logical theorems. 

Consider the disk before and after the transformation, and assume, 
contrary to the statement of the theorem, that no point remains fixed, 
so that under the transformation each point moves to another point 



Fif. 132. Transformation vectors. 


inside or on the circle. To each point P of the original disk attach a 
little arrow or ‘Vector^^ pointing in the direction PP', where P' is the 
image of P under the transformation. At every point of the disk there 
is such an arrow, for every point was assumed to move somewhere else. 



A FIXED POINT THEOREM 


253 


Now consider the points on the boundary of the circle, with their asso¬ 
ciated vectors. All of these vectors point into the circle, since, by as¬ 
sumption, no points are transformed into points outside the circle. Let 
us begin at some point Pi on the boundary and travel in the counter¬ 
clockwise direction around the circle. As we do so, the direction of 
the vector will change, for the points on the boundary have variously 
pointed vectors associated with them. The directions of these vectors 
may be shown by drawing parallel arrows that issue from a single point 
in the plane. We notice that in traversing the circle once from Pi 



Fig. 133. 


around to Pi, the vector turns around and comes back to its original 
position. Let us call the number of complete revolutions made by this 
vector the “index'' of the vectors on the circle; more precisely, we 
define the index as the algebraic sum of the various changes in angle of 
the vectors, so that each clockwise portion of a revolution is taken with 
a negative sign, while each counter-clockwise portion is regarded as 
positive. The index is the net result, which may a priori be any one 
of the numbers 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, • • • , corresponding to a total change in 
angle of 0, ±360, ±720, • • • degrees. We now assert that the index 
equals 1; that is, the total change in the direction of the arrow amounts 
to exactly one positive revolution. To show this, we recall that the 
transformation vector at any point P on the circle is always directed 



254 TOPOLOGY IV J 

inside the circle and never along the tangent. Now, if this transforma¬ 
tion vector turns through a total angle different from the total angle 
through which the tangent vector turns (which is 360®, because the 
tangent vector obviously makes one complete positive revolution), then 
the difference between the total angles through which the tangent vector 
and the transformation vector turn will be some non-zero multiple of 
360®, since each makes an integral number of revolutions. Hence the 
transformation vector must turn completely around the tangent at 
least once during the complete circuit from Pi back to Pi, and since the 
tangent and the transformation vectors turn continuously, at some 
point of the circumference the transformation vector must point directly 
along the tangent. But tUs is impossible, as we have seen. 

If we now consider any circle concentric with the circumference of 
the disk and contained within it, together with the corresponding 
transformation vectors on this circle, then the index of the transforma¬ 
tion vectors on this circle must also be 1. For as we pass continuously 
from the circumference to any concentric circle, the index must change 
continuously, since the directions of the transformation vectors vary 
continuously from point to point within the disk. But the index can 
assume only integral values and therefore must be constantly equal to 
its original value 1, since a jump from 1 to some other integer would 
be a discontinuity in the behavior of the index. (The conclusion that a 
quantity that varies continuously but can assume only integral values 
is necessarily a constant is a typical bit of mathematical reasoning which 
intervenes in many proofs.) Thus we can find a concentric circle as 
small as we please for which the index of the corresponding transforma¬ 
tion vectors is 1. But this is impossible, since by the assumed con¬ 
tinuity of the transformation the vectors on a sufficiently small circle 
will all point in approximately the same direction as the vector at the 
center of the circle. Thus the total net change of their angles can be 
made as small as we please, less than 10®, say, by taking a small enough 
circle. Hence the index, which must be an integer, will be zero. This 
contradiction shows our initial hypothesis that there is no fixed point 
under the transformation to be untenable, and completes the proof. 

The theorem just proved holds not only for a disk but also for a 
triangular or square region or any other surface that is the image of a 
disk under a topological transformation. For if A is any figure corre¬ 
lated with a disk by a biunique and continuous transformation, then a 
continuous transformation of A into itself which had no fixed point 
would define a continuous transformation of the disk into itself without 



A FIXED POINT THEOREM 


255 


a fixed point, which we have proved to be impossible. The theorem 
also holds in three dimensions for solid spheres or cubes, but the proof 
is not so simple. 

Although the Brouwer fixed point theorem for the disk is not very obvious to 
the intuition, it is easy to show that it is an immediate consequence of the follow¬ 
ing fact, the truth of which is intuitively evident: It is impossible to transform 
continuously a circular disk into its circumference alone so that each point of the 
circumference remains fixed. We shall show that the existence of a fixed-point- 
free transformation of a disk into itself would contradict this fact. Suppose 
P P' were such a transformation; for each point P of the disk we could draw an 
arrow starting at P' and continuing through P until it reached the circumference 
at some point P*. Then the transformation P —► P* would be a continuous 
transformation of the whole disk into its circumference alone and would leave 
each point of the circumference fixed, contrary to the assumption that such a 
transformation is impossible. Similar reasoning may be used to establish the 
Brouwer theorem in three dimensions for the solid sphere or cube. 

It is easy to see that some geometrical figures do admit continuous fixed-point- 
free transformations into themselves. For example, the ring-shaped region be¬ 
tween two concentric circles admits as a continuous fixed-point-free transforma¬ 
tion a rotation through any angle not a multiple of 360® about its center. The 
surface of a sphere admits the continuous fixed-point-free transformation that 
takes each point into its diametrically opposite point. But it may be proved, by 
reasoning analogous to that which we have used for the disk, that any continuous 
transformation which carries no point into its diametrically opposite point (e.g., 
any small deformation) has a fixed point. 

Fixed point theorems such as these provide a powerful method for the proof 
of many mathematical ^'existence theorems’’ which at first sight may not seem 
to be of a geometrical character. A famous example is a fixed point theorem 
conjectured by Poincar6 in 1912, shortly before his death. This theorem has as 
an immediate consequence the existence of an infinite number of periodic orbits 
in the restricted problem of three bodies. Poincar6 was unable to confirm his 
conjecture, and it was a major achievement of American mathematics when in 
the following year G. D. Birkhoff succeeded in giving a proof. Since then topolog¬ 
ical methods have been applied with great success to the study of the qualitative 
behaviour of dynamical systems. 


5. Knots 

As a final example it may be pointed out that the study of knots 
presents difficult mathematical problems of a topological character. A 
knot is formed by first looping and interlacing a piece of string and then 
joining the ends together. The resulting closed curve represents a ge¬ 
ometrical figure that remains essentially the same even if it is deformed 
by pulling or twisting without breaking the string. But how is it pos¬ 
sible to give an intrinsic characterization that will distinguish a knotted 
closed curve in space from an unknotted curve such as the circle? The 



256 


TOPOLOGY 


IVl 


answer is by no means simple, and still less so is the complete mathe¬ 
matical analysis of the various kinds of knots and the differences between 
them. Even for the simplest case this has proved to be a sizable task. 
Consider the two trefoil knots shown in Figure 134. These two knots 
are completely symmetrical ''mirror images^^ of one another, and are 
topologically equivalent, but they are not congruent. The problem 
arises whether it is possible to deform one of these knots into the other 
in a continuous way. The answer is in the negative, but the proof of 
this fact requires considerably more knowledge of the technique of 
topology and group theory than can be presented here. 



Fig. 134. Topologically equivalent knots that aro not deformable into one another. 


§4. THE TOPOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION OF SURFACES 

1. The Genus of a Surface 

Many simple but important topological facts arise in the study of 
two-dimensional surfaces. For example, let us compare the surface of 
a sphere with that of a torus. It is clear from Figure 135 that the two 
surfaces differ in a fundamental way: on the sphere, as in the plane, 
every simple closed curve such as C separates the surface into two parts. 
But on the torus there exist closed curves such as C' that do not 




Fig. 133. Guta on aphero and tonia. 



THE GENUS OF A SURFACE 


257 


separate the surface into two parts. To say that C separates the sphere 
into two parts means that if the sphere is cut along C it will fall into 
two distinct and unconnected pieces, or, what amounts to the same 
thing, that we can find two points on the sphere such that any curve 
on the sphere which joins them must intersect C. On the other hand, 
if the torus is cut along the closed curve C', the resulting surface still 
hangs together: any point of the surface can be joined to any other 
point by a curve that does not intersect C'. This difference between 
the sphere and the torus marks the two types of surfaces as topologically 
distinct, and shows that it is impossible to deform one into the other 
in a continuous way. 

Next let us consider the surface with two holes shown in Figure 136. 
On this surface we can draw two non-intersecting closed curves A and B 
which do not separate the surface. The torus is always separated into 
two parts by any two such curves. On the other hand, three closed non¬ 
intersecting curves always separate the surface with two holes. 



Fig. 136. A surface of genus 2. 


These facts suggest that we define the genus of a surface as the largest 
number of non-intersecting simple closed curves that can be drawn on 
the surface without separating it. The genus of the sphere is 0, that of 
the torus is 1, while that of the surface in Figure 136 is 2. A similar 
surface with p holes has the genus p. The genus is a topological prop¬ 
erty of a surface and remains the same if the surface is deformed. Con¬ 
versely, it may be shown (we omit the proof) that if two closed surfaces 
have the same genus, then one may be deformed into the other, so that 
the genus p = 0, 1, 2, • • • of a closed surface characterizes it completely 
from the topological point of view. (We are assuming that the surfaces 
considered are ordinary '^two-sided'' closed surfaces. In Article 3 of 
this section we shall consider “one-sided” surfaces.) For example, 
the two-holed doughnut and the sphere with two “handles” of Figure 137 




258 


TOPOLOGY 


IVI 


are both closed surfaces of genus 2, and it is clear that either of these 
surfaces may be continuously deformed into the other. Since the 
doughnut with p holes, or its equivalent, the sphere with p handles, is 




Fif. 137 SurfftOM of genu« 2. 



of genus p, we may take either of these surfaces as the topological 
representative of all closed surfaces of genus p. 

*2. The Euler Characteristic of a Surface 

Suppose that a closed surface S of genus p is divided into a number 
of regions by marking a number of vertices on S and joining them by 
curved arcs. We shall show that 

(1) F - JS; + F = 2 - 2p, 

where V = number of vertices, E = number of arcs, and F == number 
of regions. The number 2 — 2p is called the Euler characteristic of the 
surface. We have already seen that for the sphere, V — E + F — 2, 
which agrees with (1), since p = 0 for the sphere. 

To prove the general formula (1), we may assume that S is a sphere 
with p handles. For, as we have stated, any surface of genus p 
may be continuously deformed into such a surface, and during this 
deformation the numbers V — E + F and 2 — 2p will not change. 
We shall choose the deformation so as to ensure that the closed curves 
Ai f A 2 y Bi f 8% f • • • where the handles join the sphere consist of arcs 
of the given subdivision. (We refer to Fig. 138, which illustrates the 
proof for the case p = 2.) 




Fif.i8a 



EULER CHARACTERISTIC OF A SURFACE 


259 


Now let us cut the surface S along the curves A 2 , B 2 , • • • and 
straighten the handles out. Each handle will have a free edge bounded 
by a new curve A*, B*, • • • with the same number of vertices and arcs 
as -42, £ 2 , • • • respectively. Hence 7 — E + E will not change, since 
the additional vertices exactly counterbalance the additional arcs, while 
no new regions are created. Next, we deform the surface by flattening 
out the projecting handles, until the resulting surface is simply a sphere 
from which 2p regions have been removed. Since V — E + E is known 
to equal 2 for any subdivision of the whole sphere, we have 

7-E + F = 2-2p 

for the sphere with 2p regions removed, and hence for the original sphere 
with p handles, as was to be proved. 

Figure 121 illustrates the application of formula (1) to a surface S 
consisting of flat polygons. This surface may be continuously deformed 
into a torus, so that the genus p is 1 and 2 — 2p = 2 — 2 = 0. As 
predicted by formula (1), 

V - E + F = 16 - 32 + 16 = 0. 

Exercise: Subdivide the doughnut with two holes of Figure 137 into regions, 
and show that V — E + F ^ —2. 

3. One-Sided Surfaces 

An ordinary surface has two sides. This applies both to closed 
surfaces like the sphere or the torus and to surfaces with boundary 
curves, such as the disk or a torus from which a piece has been re¬ 
moved. The two sides of such a surface could be painted with different 
colors to distinguish them. If the surface is closed, the two colors never 
meet. If the surface has boundary curves, the two colors meet only 
along these curves. A bug crawling along such a surface and prevented 
from crossing boundary curves, if any exist, would always remain on 
the same side. 

Moebius made the surprising discovery that there are surfaces with 
only one side. The simplest such surface is the so-called Moebius strip, 
formed by taking a long rectangular strip of paper and pasting its two 
ends together after giving one a half-twist, as in Figure 139. A bug 
crawling along this surface, keeping always to the middle of the strip, 
will return to its original position upside down. The Moebius strip has 
only one edge, for its boundary consists of a single closed curve. The 
ordinary two-sided surface formed by pasting together the two ends of a 



260 


TOPOLOGY 


IV 


rectangle without twisting has two distinct boundary curves. If the 
latter strip is cut along the center line it falls apart into two different 
strips of the same kind. But if the Moebius strip is cut along this 
line (shown in Figure 139) we find that it remains in one piece. It is 
rare for anyone not familiar with the Moebius strip to predict this 





behavior, so contrary to one's intuition of what “should" occur. If the 
surface that results from cutting the Moebius strip along the middle is 
again cut along its middle, two separate but intertwined strips are 
formed. 

It is fascinating to play with such strips by cutting them along lines 
parallel to a boundary curve and 1/2, 1/3, etc. of the distance across. 

The boundary of a Moebius strip is an unknotted closed curve which 



ONE-SIDED SURFACES 


261 


can be deformed into a flat one e.g. a circle. During the deformation, 
the strip may he allowed to intersect itself so that a onesided selfinter- 
secting surface results as in Figure 140 known as a cross-cap. The locus 
of selfintersection is regarded as two different lines, each belonging to 




one of the two portions of the surface which intersect there. The one¬ 
sidedness of the Moebius strip is preserved because this property is 
topological; a one-sided surface cannot be continuously deformed into 
a two-sided surface. Strikingly enough it is even possible to conduct 


262 


TOPOLOGY 


(VI 


the deformation in such a way that the boundary of the Moebius strip 
becomes flat, e.g. triangular, while the strip remains free from selfin¬ 
tersections. Figure 141 indicates such a model, due to Dr. B. Tucker- 
mann; the boundary is a triangle defining one half of one diagonal square 
of a regular octahedron; the strip itself consists of six faces of the octa¬ 
hedron and four rectangular triangles, each one fourth of a diagonal 
plane. 

Another interesting one-sided surface is the “Klein bottle.” This 
surface is closed, but it has no inside or outside. It is topologically 
equivalent to a pair of cross-caps with their boundaries coinciding. 



Fig. 142. Kiein bottle. 


It may be shown that any closed, one-sided surface of genus p = 
1,2, •.. is topologically equivalent to a sphere from which p disks have 
been removed and replaced by cross-caps. From this it easily follows 
that the Euler characteristic V — iS + F of such a surface is related to p 
by the equation 


V-E + F==2-p. 

The proof is analogous to that for two-sided surfaces. First we show that the 
Euler characteristic of a cross-cap or Moebius strip is 0. To do this we observe 
that, by cutting across a Moebius strip which has been subdivided into a number 
of regions, we obtain a rectangle that contains two more vertices, one more edge, 
and the same number of regions as the Moebius strip. For the rectangle, 
7 — E + F-1, aswe proved on page 239. Hence for the Moebius strip 
7 — E-fF — 0, As an exercise, the reader may complete the proof. 

It is considerably simpler to study the topological nature of surfaces 
such as these by means of plane polygons with certain pairs of edges 
conceptually identified (compare Chapt. IV, Appendix, Article 3). In 
the diagrams of Figure 143, parallel arrows are to be brought into coinci¬ 
dence-actual or conceptual—in position and direction. 

This method of identification may also be used to define three-dimen¬ 
sional closed manifolds, analogous to the two-dimensional closed sur¬ 
faces. For example, if we identify corresponding points of opposite 



ONE-SIDED SURFACES 


263 



MOEBIUS STRIP KLEIN BOHLE 

Fig. 143. Cloeed lurfacet defined by eodrdination of edges in plane figure. 



Fig. 144. Three-dimensional torus defined by boundary identification. 








264 


TOPOLOGY 


IVl 


faces of a cube (Fig. 144), we obtain a closed, three-dimensional manifold 
called the three-dimensional torus. This manifold is topologically 
equivalent to the space between two concentric torus surfaces, one inside 
the other, in which corresponding points of the two torus surfaces are 
identified (Fig. 145). For the latter manifold is obtained from the cube 
if two pairs of conceptually identified faces are brought together. 



Fig. 145. Another representation of three<dimen8ionBl torus. (Figure out to^show identifioaUoa^ 


APPENDIX 

*1. The Five C!oIor Theorem 

On the basis of Euler's formula, we can prove that every map on the 
sphere can be properly colored by using at most five different colors. 
(According to p. 247, a map is regarded as properly colored if no two 
regions having a whole segment of their boundaries in common receive 
the same color.) We shall confine ourselves to maps whose regions are 
bounded by simple closed polygons composed of circular arcs. We may 
also suppose that exactly three arcs meet at each vertex; such a map 
will be called regular. For if we replace every vertex at which more 
than three arcs meet by a small circle, and join the interior of each such 
circle to one of the regions meeting at the vertex, we obtain a new map in 
which the multiple vertices are replaced by a number of triple vertices. 
The new map will contain the same number of regions as the original 
map. If this new map, which is regular, can be properly colored with 
five colors, then by shrinking the circles down to points we shall have 
the desired coloring of the original map. Thus it suffices to prove that 
any regular map on the sphere can be colored with five colors. 

First we show that every regular map must contain at least one 


THE FIVE COLOR THEOREM 


265 


polygon with fewer than six sides. Denote by Fn the number of regions 
of n sides in a regular map; then, if F denotes the total number of regions, 

(1) F F 2 + Fz + F,+ ... . 

Each arc has two ends, and three arcs end at each vertex. Hence, if E 
denotes the number of arcs in the map, and V the number of vertices, 

( 2 ) 2E = 3F. 

Furthermore, a region bounded by n arcs has n vertices, and each vertex 
belongs to three regions, so that 

(3) 2E = SV = 2 F 2 4“ SF 2 ”h 4 F 4 
By Euler’s formula, we have 

7 - £ + F = 2 , or 67 - 6 £ + 6 F = 12 . 

From (2), we see that 67 = 4£, so that 6F — 2E = 12. 

Hence, from ( 1 ) and (3), 

6 (F 2 + ^8 +F 4 + •••) — {2F 2 + 3F8 + 4F 4 + • • • ) == 12, 
or 

(6 ~ 2 ) F 2 + (6 - 3 ) F8 + (6 - 4 ) F4 + (6 - 5)^8 + (6 - 6 ) F « 

+ (6 - 7)F7 + • • • = 12. 

Hence at least one of the terms on the left must be positive, so that at 
least one of the numbers F 2 , F 3 ,^ 4,^5 is positive, as we wished to show. 

Now to prove the five color theorem. Let M be any regular map on 
the sphere with n regions in all. We know that at least one of these 
regions has fewer than six sides. 

Case 1, M contains a region A with 2 , 3, or 4 sides. In this case, 
remove the boundary between A and one of the regions adjoining it. 
(If A has 4 sides, one region may come around and touch two non- 
adjacent sides of i4. In this case, by the Jordan curve theorem, the 
regions touching the other two sides of A will be distinct, and we remove 
the boundary between A and one of the latter regions.) 



Fig. 146. 




266 


TOPOLOGY 


[V] 


The resulting map Af' will be a regular map with n — 1 regions. If M' 
can be properly colored with 5 colors, so can M. For since at most four 
regions of M adjoin A, we can always find a fifth color for A. 

Case 2, M contains a region A with five sides. Consider the five 
regions adjoining A, and call them B, C, D, E, and F. We can always 
find a pair among these which do not touch each other; for if, say, B 
and D touch, they will prevent C from touching either E or F, since any 
path leading from C to £ or F will have to go through at least one of the 
regions A, B, and D (Fig. 147). (It is clear that this fact, too, depends 
essentially on the Jordan curve theorem, which holds for the plane or 
sphere. It is not true on the torus, for example.) We may therefore 
assume, say, that C and F do not touch. We remove the sides of A 



adjoining C and F, forming a new map M' with n — 2 regions, which is 
also regular. If the new map can be properly colored with five colors, then 
so can the original map M, For when the boundaries are restored, A will 
be in contact with no more than four different colors, since C and F 
have the same color, and we can therefore find a fifth color for ^4. 

Thus in either case if Af is a regular map with n regions, we can con¬ 
struct a new regular map M' having n — 1 or n — 2 regions, and such 
that if M' can be colored with five colors, so can Af. This process may 
again be applied to Af' etc., and leads to a sequence of maps derived 
from Af: 

M, M\ M", .... 

Since the number of regions in the maps of this sequence steadily de¬ 
creases, we must finally arrive at a map with five or fewer regions. 
Such a map can always be colored with at most five colors. Hence, 



THE FIVE COLOR THEOREM 


267 


returning step by step to Af, we see that M itself can be colored with 
five colors. This completes the proof. Note that this proof is con¬ 
structive, in that it gives a perfectly practicable, although wearisome, 
method of actually coloring any map with n regions in a finite number 
of steps. 


2. The Jordan Curve Theorem for Polygons 

The Jordan curve theorem states that any simple closed curve C 
divides the points of the plane not oh C into two distinct domains (with 
no points in common) of which C is the common boundary. We shall 
give a proof of this theorem for the case where C is a closed polygon P, 

We shall show that the points of the plane not on P fall into two 
classes, A and By such that any two points of the same class can be 
joined by a polygonal path which does not cross P, while any path 
joining a point of ^ to a point of B must cross P. The class A will 
form the “outside’* of the polygon, while the class B will form the 
“inside.” 

We begin the proof by choosing a fixed direction in the plane, not 
parallel to any of the sides of P. Since P has but a finite number of 
sides, this is always possible. We now define the classes A and B as 
follows: 

The point p belongs to A if the ray through p in the fixed direction 
intersects P in an even number, 0, 2, 4, 6, • • • , of points. The point p 
belongs to P if the ray through p in the fixed direction intersects P in 
an odd number, 1, 3, 5, • • • , of points. 

With regard to rays that intersect P at vertices, we shall not count an 
intersection at a vertex where both edges of P meeting at the vertex 
are on the same side of the ray, but we shall count an intersection at 
a vertex where the two edges are on opposite sides of the ray. We shall 
say that two points p and q have the same “parity” if they belong to 
the same class, A or P. 



Fic. 148. Counting interoeotions. 



268 


TOPOLOGY 


[VI 


First we observe that all the points on any line segment not inter¬ 
secting P have the same parity. For the parity of a point p moving 
along such a segment can only change when the ray in the fixed direction 
through p passes through a vertex of P, and in neither of the two 
possible cases will the parity actually change, because of the agreement 
made in the preceding paragraph. From this it follows that if any 
point Pi of A is joined to a point p 2 of B by a polygonal path, then this path 
must intersect P, for otherwise the parity of all the points of the path, 
and in particular of pi and p 2 , would be the same. Moreover, we can 
show that any two points of the same class, A or B, can be joined by a 
polygonal path which does not intersect P. Call the two points p and q. 
If the straight segment pq joining p to q does not intersect P it is the 
desired path. Otherwise, let p' be the first point of intersection of this 
segment with P, and let g' be the last such point (Fig. 149). Construct 
the path starting from p along the segment pp', then turning off just 
before p' and following along P until P returns to pq at q\ If we can 
prove that this path will intersect pq between g' and q, rather than 
between p' and g', then the path may be continued to q along q'q without 
intersecting P. It is clear that any two points r and s near enough to 
each other, but on opposite sidhs of some segment of P, must have 
different parity, for the ray through r will intersect P in one more point 
than will the ray through s. Thus we see that the parity changes as 
we cross the point g' along the segment pq. It follows that the dotted 
path crosses pq between g' and g, since p and g (and hence every point 
on the dotted path) have the same parity. 



This completes the proof of the Jordan curve theorem for the case 
of a polygon P. The ^‘outside” of P may now be identified as the 
class A, since if we travel far enough along any ray in the fixed direction 
we shall come to a point beyond which there will be no intersection 
with P, so that all such points have parity 0, and hence belong to A. 
This leaves the ‘‘inside'' of P identified with the class B, No matter 


JORDAN CURVE THEOREM FOR POLYGONS 


269 


how twisted the simple closed polygon P, we can always determine 
whether a given point p of the plane is inside or outside P by drawing a 
ray and counting the number of intersections of the ray with P. If this 
number is odd, then the point p is imprisoned within P, and cannot 
escape without crossing P at some point. If the number is even, then 
the point p is outside P. (Try this for Figure 128.) 

*One may also prove the Jordan curve theorem for polygons in the following 
way; Define the order of a point po with respect to any closed curve C which does 
not pass through po as the net number of complete revolutions made by an arrow 
joining po to a moving point p on the curve as p traverses the curve once. Let 
A all points po not on P and with even order with respect to P, 

B « all points po not on P and with odd order with respect to P. 

Then A and B, thus defined, form the outside and inside of P respectively. The 
carrying out of the details of this proof is left as an exercise. 

The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra 

The ‘fundamental theorem of algebra^^ states that if 

(1) f{^) = 2 " + an-l2^ ^ *+•••+ ai2 + Oo , 

where n > 1, and On-i, an-t , • • • , Oo are any complex numbers, then 
there exists a complex number a such that f{a) = 0. In other words, 
in the field of complex numbers every polynomial equation has a root, (On 
p. 102 we drew the conclusion that f{z) can be factored into n linear 
factors: 

f(z) = {z - ai){z - a 2 ) ••• (z - an), 

where ai, a 2 , • • • , an are the zeros of It is remarkable that this 

theorem can be proved by considerations of a topological character, 
related to those used in proving the Brouwer fixed point theorem. 

The reader will recall that a complex number is a symbol x + yit 
where x and y are real numbers and i has the property that i^ = — 1. 
The complex number x + yi may be represented by the point in the 
plane whose coordinates with respect to a pair of perpendicular axes 
are x, y. If we introduce polar coordinates in this plane, taking the 
origin and the positive direction of the x-axis as pole and prime direction 
respectively, we may write 

z — X + yi r (cos ^ + t sin d), 
where r = y/x"^ + y^- It follows from De Moivre’s formula that 
g'* = r" (cos + i sin nB). 



270 


TOPOLOGY 


[v: 

(See p. 96.) Thus, if we allow the complex number z to describe a 
circle of radius r about the origin, a" will describe n complete times a 
circle of radius r“ as 2 describes its circle once. We also recall that r, the 
modulus of 2 , written | 2 |, gives the distance of 2 from 0, and that if 
2 ' = *' + iy', then | 2 — 2 ' | is the distance between 2 and z'. With 
these preliminaries we may proceed to the proof of the theorem. 

Let us suppose that the polynomial (1) has no root, so that for every 
complex number 2 

/(*) 0 . 

On this assumption, if we now allow 2 to describe any closed curve in 
thea;,y-plane, /( 2 ) will describe a closed curve F which never passes 



through the origin (Fig. 150). We may, therefore, define the order of 
the origin 0 with respect to the function /( 2 ) for any closed curve C 
as <Ae ne< number of complete revolutions made by an arrow joining O to a 
point on the curve F traced out by the point representing f(z) as 2 traces 
out the curve C. As the curve C we shall take a cird^ with 0 as 
center and with radius t, and we define the function <^(<) to be the order 
of 0 with respect to the function/( 2 ) for the circle about 0 with radius t. 
Clearly ^(0) = 0, since a circle with radius 0 is a single point, and the 
curve F reduces to the point /(O) 9 ^ 0. Wp shall show in the next 




FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF ALGEBRA 


271 


paragraph that = n for large values of L But the order depends 
continuously on t, since f{z) is a continuous function of z. Hence we 
shall have a contradiction, for the function 4>(t) can assume only integral 
values and therefore cannot pass continuously from the value 0 to the 
value n. 

It remains only to show that <^(0 = n for large values of t. We ob¬ 
serve that on a circle of radius z = t so large that 

t > 1 and f>laol + |ni| + **' + l L 
we have the inequality 

\f{z) — Z’* I = I ^ + • • • + Oo I 

< I an-l I • I 2 P ^ + I nn-2 I'l^P * + ••• + |<Io| 

<r H 1 <*n-l I + I (ln-2 I + • • • + I Uo I ] < r = j |. 

Since the expression on the left is the distance between the two points 
z"" and f(z)j while the last expression on the right is the distance of the 
point z'" from the origin, we see that the straight line segment joining 
the two points f(z) and z” cannot pass through the origin so long as z 
is on the circle of radius t about the origin. This being so, we may 
continuously deform the curve traced out by /(z) into the curve traced 
out by z" without ever passing through the origin, simply by pushing 
each point/(z) along the segment joining it to z". Since the order of 
the origin will vary continuously and can assume only integral values 
during this deformation, it must be the same for both curves. Since 
the order for z” is n, the order for/(z) must also be n. This completes 
the proof. 



CHAPTER VI 
FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


INTRODUCTION 

The main body of modern mathematics centers around the concepts 
of function and limit. In this chapter we shall analyze these notions 
systematically. 

An expression such as 

X* + 2x - 3 

has no definite numerical value until the value of x is assigned. We 
say that the value of this expression is a function of the value of x, 
and write 

X* + 2x — 3 = /(x). 

For example, when x = 2 then 2^ + 2*2 — 3 == 5, so that/(2) = 6, 
In the same way we may find by direct substitution the value of /(x) 
for any integral, fractional, irrational, or even complex number x. 

The number of primes less than n is a function 7r(n) of the integer n. 
When a value of n is given, the value 7r(n) is determined, even though 
no algebraic expression for computing it is known. The area of a 
triangle is a function of the lengths of its three sides; it varies as the 
lengths of the sides vary and is determined when these lengths are given 
definite values. If a plane is subjected to a projective or a topological 
transformation, then the coordinates of a point after the transformation 
depend on, i.e. are functions of, the original coordinates of the point. 
The concept of function enters whenever quantities are connected by a 
definite physical relationship. The volume of a gas enclosed in a 
cylinder is a function of the temperature and of the pressure on the 
piston. The atmospheric pressure as observed in a balloon is a function 
of the altitude above sea level. The whole domain of periodic phe¬ 
nomena—^the motion of the tides, the vibrations of a plucked string, the 
emission of light waves from an incandescent filament—is governed by 
the simple trigonometric functions sin x and cos x. 

To Leibniz (1646-1716), who first used the word “function,^' and to 

272 



INTRODUCTION 


273 


the mathematicians of the eighteenth century, the idea of a functional 
relationship was more or less identified with the existence of a simple 
mathematical formula expressing the exact nature of the relationship. 
This concept proved too narrow for the requirements of mathematical 
physics, and the idea of a function, together with the related notion of 
limit, was subjected to a long process of generalization and clarification, 
of which we shall give an account in this chapter. 

§1. VARIABLE AND FUNCTION 

1. Definitions and Examples 

Often mathematical objects occur which we are free to choose arbi¬ 
trarily from a whole set S of objects. Then we call such an object a 
variable within the range or domain S, It is customary to use letters 
from the latter portion of the alphabet for variables. Thus if S denotes 
the set of all integers, the variable X with the domain S denotes an 
arbitrary integer. We say, *The variable X ranges over the set S,'' 
meaning that we are free to identify the symbol X with any member of 
the set S. The use of variables is convenient when we wish to make 
statements involving objects chosen at will from a whole set. For 
example, if S again denotes the set of integers and X and Y are both 
variables with the domain aS, the statement 

x+ r= r + x 

is a convenient symbolic expression of the fact that the sum of any two 
integers is independent of the order in which they are taken. A par¬ 
ticular case is expressed by the equation 

2 4-3 = 3 + 2, 

involving constants, but to express the general law, valid for all pairs 
of numbers, symbols having the meaning of variables are needed. 

It is by no means necessary that the domain S of a variable X be a 
set of numbers. For example, S might be the set of all circles in the 
plane; then X would denote any individual circle. Or S might be the 
set of all closed polygons in the plane, and X any individual polygon. 
Nor is it necessary that the domain of a variable contain an infinite 
number of elements. For example, X might denote any member of the 
population S of a given city at a given time. Or X might denote any 
one of the possible remainders when an integer is divided by 5; in this 
case the domain S would consist of the five numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. 



274 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVII 


The most important case of a numerical variable—in this case we 
customarily use a small letter x —is that in which the domain of vari¬ 
ability & is an interval a < a; < 6 of the real number axis. We then 
call X a continuous variable in the interval. The domain of variability 
of a continuous variable may be extended to infinity. Thus S may be 
the set of all positive real numbers, x > 0, or even the set of all real 
numbers without exception. In a similar way we may consider a vari¬ 
able X whose values are the points in a plane or in some given domain 
of the plane, such as the interior of a rectangle or of a circle. Since 
each point of the plane is defined by its two coordinates, x, 2 /, with re¬ 
spect to a fixed pair of axes, we often say in this case that we have a 
pair of continuous variables^ x and y. 

It may be that with each value of a variable X there is associated a 
definite value of another variable U. Then U is called a function of X. 
The way in which U is related to X is expressed by a symbol such as 

U = F(X) (read, ‘T of 

If X ranges over the set S, then the variable U will range over another 
set, say T. For example, if S is the set of all triangles X in the plane, 
a function F{X) may be defined by assigning to each triangle X the 
length, U = F(X), of its perimeter; T will be the set of all positive 
numbers. Here we note that two different triangles, Xi and X 2 , may 
have the same perimeter, so that the equation F(Xi) = F{X^ is possible 
even though Xi ^ X%. A projective transformation of one plane, aS, 
onto another, T, assigns to each point X of aS a single point U ol T 
according to a definite rule which we may express by the functional 
symbol U = F(X). In this case F(Xi) 7^ F{X^ whenever Xi Xj, 
and we say that the mapping of S onto T is hiunique (see p. 78). 

Functions of a continuous variable are often defined by algebraic ex¬ 
pressions. Examples are the functions 


u = 



u = 


1 

1 + x^' 


In the first and last of these expressions, x may range over the whole 
set of real numbers; while in the second, x may range over the set of 
real numbers with the exception of 0—the value 0 being excluded since 
1/0 is not a number. 

The number B(n) of prime factors of w is a function of n, where n 
ranges over the domain of all natural numbers. More generally, any 
sequence of numbers, Ci, a*, ai, • • •, may be regarded as the set of 



DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES 


275 


values of a function, u = F{n), where the domain of the independent 
variable n is the set of natural numbers. It is only for brevity that we 
write On for the nth term of the sequence, instead of the more explicit 
functional notation F(n) The expressions discussed in Chapter I, 

&(») - 1' + 2’+ ... + n' = + l)(2»i + 1) 

6 

5a(n) = 1’ + 2’ + ... + n* = 

are functions of the integral variable n. 

If = F{X) we usually reserve for X the name independent variable, 
while U is called the dependent variable^ since its value depends on the 
value chosen for X. 

It may happen that the same value of U is assigned to all values of X, 
so that the set T consists of one element only. We then have the 
special case where the value U of the function does not actually vary; 
that is, U is constant. We shall include this case under the general 
concept of function, even though this might seem strange to a beginner, 
for whom the emphasis naturally seems to lie in the idea that U varies 
when X does. But it will do no harm—and will in fact be useful—to 
regard a constant as the special case of a variable whose “domain of 
variation^^ consists of a single element only. 

The concept of function is of the greatest importance, not only in 
pure mathematics but also in practical applications. Physical laws are 
nothing but statements concerning the way in which certain quantities 
depend on others when some of these are permitted to vary. Thus the 
pitch of the note emitted by a plucked string depends on the length, 
weight, and tension of the string, the pressure of the atmosphere depends 
on the altitude, and the energy of a bullet depends on its mass and 
velocity. ♦ The task of the physicist is to determine the exact or approxi¬ 
mate nature of this functional dependence. 

The function concept permits an exact mathematical characterization 
of motion. If a moving particle is concentrated at a point in space with 
rectangular coordinates x, y, z, and if t measures the time, then the 
motion of the particle is completely described by giving its coordinates 
X, y, z as functions of t: 

* = /(<), y = ff(0, 


2 = A(t). 



276 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VII 


Thus, if a particle falls freely along the vertical 2 ;-axis under the influ¬ 
ence of gravity alone, 

X = 0, 2/ = 0, 2 « 

where g is the acceleration due to gravity. If a particle rotates uni¬ 
formly on a circle of unit radius in the x, y-plane, its motion is char¬ 
acterized by the functions 

X == cos o)tf y = sin (t)t, 

where w is a constant, the so-called angular velocity of the motion. 

A mathematical function is simply a law governing the interdepend¬ 
ence of variable quantities. It does not imply the existence of any 
relationship of “cause and effect’' between them. Although in ordinary 
language the word “function” is often used with the latter connota¬ 
tion, we shall avoid all such philosophical interpretations. For example, 
Boyle’s law for a gas contained in an enclosure at constant temperature 
states that the product of the pressure p and the volume y is a constant c 
(whose value in turn depends on the temperature): 

pv = c. 

This relation may be solved for either p or y as a function of the other 
variable. 


c c 

p = or y = 

V p 

without implying that a change in volume is the “cause” of a change in 
pressure any more than that the change in pressure is the “cause” of 
the change in volume It is only the form of the connection between the 
two variables which is relevant to the mathematician. 

Mathematicians and physicists differ sometimes as to the aspect of the func¬ 
tion concept on which they put the emphasis. The former usually stresses the 
law of correspondence y the mathematical operation that is applied to the independ¬ 
ent variable x to obtain the value of the dependent variable u. In this sense 
f( ) is a symbol for a mathematical operation; the value u ••fix) is the result of 
applying the operation /( ) to the number x. On the other hand, the physicist is 
often more interested in the quantity u as such than in any mathematical pro¬ 
cedure by which the values of u can be computed from those of x. Thus the re¬ 
sistance u of the air to a moving object depends on the velocity v and can be found 
by experiment, whether or not an explicit mathematical formula for computing 
u ■■ /(y) 18 known. It is the actual resistance which primarily interests the 
physicist and not any particular mathematical formula/(y), except insofar as the 
study of such a formula may aid in analyzing the behavior of the quantity u. This 
is the attitude ordinarily taken if one applies mathematics to physics or engineer¬ 
ing. In more advanced calculations with functions confusion can sometimes be 



DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES 


277 


avoided only by knowing exactly whether one means the operation /( ) which 
assigns to a; a quantity u « /(x), or the quantity u itself, which may also be con¬ 
sidered to depend, in a quite different manner, on some other variable, z. For 
example, the area of a circle is given by the function u = /(x) = rx*, where x is the 
radius, and also by the function u « g(z) =» z*/^t, where z is the circumference. 

Perhaps the simplest types of mathematical functions of one variable 
are the polynomials, of the form 

u = f{x) = Oo + aiz + a2X^ -f ... + anx"", 

with constant “coefficients/’ Oq , ai , • • • ,an . Next come the rational 
functions, such as 

1 1 2x + 1 

^ ^ l + x^^ ^ x* + 3a:2-+-5’ 

which are quotients of polynomials, and the trigonometric functions, cos x, 
sin X, and tan x = sin a:/cos x, which are best defined by reference to 
the unit circle in the f, ?j-plane, = 1. If the point P($, rj) moves 

on the circumference of this circle, and if x is the directed angle through 
which the positive {-axis must be rotated in order to coincide with OP, 
then cos x and sin x are the coordinates of P: cos a: = {, sin a; = ry. 

2. Radian Measure of Angles 

For all practical purposes angles are measured in units obtained by 
subdividing a right angle into a number of equal parts. If this number 
is 90, then the unit is the familiar “degree.” A subdivision into 100 
parts would be better adapted to our decimal system, but would repre¬ 
sent the same principle of measuring. For theoretical purposes, how¬ 
ever, it is advantageous to use an essentially different method of char¬ 
acterizing the size of an angle, the so-called radian measure. Many 
important formulas involving the trigonometric functions of angles have 
a simpler form in this system than if the angles are measured in degrees. 

To find the radian measure of an angle we describe a circle of radius 1 
about the vertex of the angle. The angle will cut out an arc s on the 
circumference of this circle, and we define the length of this arc as the 
radian measure of the angle. Since the total circumference of a circle 
with radius 1 has the length 27r, the full angle of 360° has the radian 
measure 27r. It follows that if x denotes the radian measure of an 
angle and y its degree measure, then x and y are connected by the 
relation 2//360 = x/2Tr or 


vy = 180x. 



278 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


(VI) 


Thus an angle of 90® {y = 90) has the radian measure x — 90ir/180 = 
t/ 2, etc. On the other hand, an angle of 1 radian (the angle with 
radian measure x = 1) is the angle that cuts out an arc* equal to 
the radius of the circle; in degrees this will be an angle of y = 180/ir = 
67.2957 • • • degrees. We must always multiply the radian measure x 
of an angle by the factor 180/ir to obtain its degree measure y. 

The radian measure x of an angle is also equal to twice the area A 
of the sector of the unit circle cut out by the angle; for this area bears 
to the whole area of the circle the ratio which the arc along the cir¬ 
cumference bears to the whole circumference: x/2x = Air, x = 2A. 

Henceforth the angle x will mean the angle whose radian measure is x. 
An angle of x degrees will be written x°, to avoid ambiguity. 

It will become apparent that radian measure is very convenient for 
analytic operations. For practical use, however, it would be rather 
inconvenient. Since is irrational, we shall never return to the same 
point of the circle if we mark off repeatedly the unit angle, i.e. the angle 
of radian measure 1. The ordinary measure is so devised that after 
marking off 1 degree 360 times, or 90 degrees 4 times, we return to the 
same position. 


3. The Graph of a Function. Inverse Functions 

The character of a function is often most clearly shown by a simple 
geometrical graph. If x, u are coordinates in a plane with respect to a 
pair of perpendicular axes, then linear functions such as 

u = ax b 


are represented by straight lines; quadratic functions such as 

u = ax^ + bx + c 
by parabolas; the function 


1 


w = - 

X 


by a hyperbola, etc. By definition, the graph of any function u = j(x) 
consists of all the points in the plane whose coSrdinates x, u are in the 
relationship u — /(x). The functions sin x, cos x, tan x, are repre¬ 
sented by the curves in Figures 151 and 152. These graphs show 
clearly how the values of the functions increase or decrease as x varies. 



THE GRAPH OF A FUNCTION 


279 




An important method for introducing new functions is the following. 
Beginning with a known function, F(Z), we may try to solve the equa¬ 
tion U = F{X) for X, so that X will appear as a function of U : 

X = G(C/). 

The function G{1)) is then called an inverse Junction of F{X). This 
process leads to a unique result only if the function U = F{X) defines a 
biunique mapping of the domain of X onto that of t/, i.e. if the in¬ 
equality Xi 9 ^ X 2 always implies the inequality F{Xi) 9 ^ F{X 2 ), for 
only then will there be a uniquely defined X correlated with each J7. 
Our previous example in which X denoted any triangle in the plane and 
U = F{X) was its perimeter is a case in point. Obviously this mapping 
of the set S of triangles onto the set T of positive real numbers is not 
biunique, since there are infinitely many different triangles with the 
same perimeter. Hence in this case the relation U = F(X) does not 
serve to define a unique inverse function. On the other hand, the func¬ 
tion m = 2n, where n ranges over the set S of integers and m over the 


280 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


tvi 


set T of even integers, does give a biunique correspondence between 
the two sets, and the inverse function n = to/ 2 is uniquely defined. 
Another example of a biunique mapping is provided by the function 



Fig. 153. u « at*. 

Ab X ranges over the set of all real numbers, u will likewise range over 
the set of all real numbers, assuming each value once and only once. 
The uniquely defined inverse function is 

X = 

In the case of the function 

u = 

an inverse function is not uniquely determined. For since w = x“ = 
(—x)*, each positive value of u will have two antecedents. But if, as 
is customary, we define the symbol \/u to mean the positive number 
whose square is w, then the inverse function 

X = y/u 

exists, so long as we restrict x and u to positive values. 

The existence of a unique inverse of a function of one variable, u = /(x), 
can be seen by a glance at the graph of the function. The inverse 
function will be uniquely defined only if to each value of u there corre¬ 
sponds but one value of x. In terms of the graph, this means that no 
parallel to the x-axis intersects the graph in more than one point. This 
will certainly be the case if the function u = /(x) is monotone^ i.e. 
steadily increasing or steadily decreasing as x increases. For example, 
if w = /(x) is steadily increasing, then for Xi < X 2 we always have ui = 
f(xi) < = /(xa). Hence for a given value of u there can be at most 

one X such that u = /(x), and the inverse function will be uniquely 



THE GRAPH OP A FUNCTION 


281 


defined. The graph of the inverse function z ^ g{u) is obtained merely 
by rotating the original graph through an angle of 180® about the dotted 
line (Fig. 154), so that the positions of thex-axisand theu-axisare inter^ 
changed. The new position of the graph will depict x as a function of w. 
In its original position the graph shows u as the height above the hori¬ 
zontal x-axis, while after the rotation the same graph shows x as the 
height above the horizontal w-axis. 



Fig. 154. Inverse functions. 


The considerations of the preceding paragraph may be illustrated for 
the case of the function 

u = tan X. 

This function is monotone for — x/2 < x < ir/2 (Fig. 152). The values 
of Uy which increase steadily with x, range from — oo to + <»; hence 
the inverse function, 

X = g{u), 

is defined for all values of u. This function is denoted by tan“' u or 
arc tan u. Thus arc tan(l) = ir/4, since tan 7r/4 = 1. Its graph is 
shown in Figure 155. 



Fif. 155. s i* arc taa m 









282 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVIl 


4. Compound Functions 

A second important method for creating new functions from two or 
more given ones is the compounding of functions. For example, the 
function 


« =* /(») — Vi + ** 

is “compounded” from the two simpler functions 

2 = ff(*) = 1 + **, M = h(z) — y/z, 


and can be written as 

tt - /(x) = h(g[x]) 

Likewise, 


u = fix) 


(read, "h of g of x”). 

_ 1 _ 

"s/l — 


is compounded from the three functions 

z = gix) = 1 — X*, w = hiz) = \/z, 
so that 

u = fix) = A:(%(x)]). 

The function 

u — /(x) « sin - 

X 


U = = 




is compounded from the two functions 

z * g(x) « tt — ^(z) « sin z. 

X 

The function/(x) is not defined for x =» 0, since for x « 0 the expression 1/x has 
no meaning. The graph of this remarkable function is obtained from that of the 
sine. We know that sin z « 0 for z =* where k is any positive or negative 
integer. Furthermore, 


1 for z ■■ (4A; -f 1) 

A 

— 1 for z « (4fc — 1) 


sinz - < 



COMPOUND FUNCTIONS 


283 


if h is any integer. Hence 



0 for 

X = 

1 

. 1 

sin - = < 

X 

1 for 


2 

X = 

(4fc + Dir’ 


— 1 for 


2 


X = 

(4fc - Dir’ 


If we set successively 


A: = 1, 2, 3, 4, 


then, since the denominators of these fractions increase without limit, the values 
of X for which the function sin {l/x) has the values 1, —1, 0, will cluster nearer 
and nearer to the point 1 = 0. Between any such point and the origin there will 
still be an infinite number of oscillations of the function. The graph of the 
function is shown in Figure 166. 


u 



5. Continuity 

The graphs of the functions so far considered give an intuitive idea 
of the property of continuity. We shall give a precise analysis of this 
concept in §4, after the limit concept has been put on a rigorous 
basis. But roughly speaking, we say that a function is continuous if 
its graph is an uninterrupted curve (see p. 310). A given function 
u = f{x) may be tested for continuity by letting the independent vari¬ 
able X move continuously from the right side and from the left side 
towards any specified value X \. Unless the function u = f(x) is con¬ 
stant in the neighborhood of Xi , its value will also change. If the value 
f(x) approaches as a limit the value/(xi) of the function at the specified 



284 FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS IVI ] 

point X = Xi , no matter whether we approach Xi from one side or the other^ 
then the function is said to be continuous at Xi . If this holds for every 
point Xi of a certain interval, then the function is said to be continuous 
in the interval. 

Although every function represented by an unbroken graph is con¬ 
tinuous, it is quite easy to define functions that are not everywhere 
continuous. For example, the function of Figure 167, defined for all 
values of x by setting 

f(x) = i 4- X for X > 0 

/(x) = —1-fx for x<0 



is discontinuous at the point xi = 0, where it has the value —1. If we 
try to draw a graph of this function, we shall have to lift our pencil 
from the paper at this point. If we approach the value Xi = 0 from the 
right side, then /(x) approaches +1. But this value differs from the 
actual value, — 1, at this point. The fact that — 1 is approached by /(x) 
as X tends to zero from the left side does not suffice to establish continuity. 

The function /(x) defined for all x by setting 

/(x) = 0 for X 5 ^ 0, /(O) = 1, 

presents a discontinuity of a different sort at the point Xi = 0. Here 
both right- and left-hand limits exist and are equal as x approaches 0, 
but this common limiting value differs from /(O). 



CONTINUITY 


285 


Another type of discontinuity is shown by the function of Figure 168, 

«=/(x) = 





at the point a: = 0. If a; is allowed to approach zero from either side, 
u tends to infinity; the graph of the function is broken at this point, 
and small changes of x in the neighborhood of x = 0 may produce very 
large changes in u. Strictly speaking, the value of the function is not 
defined for x = 0, since we do not admit infinity as a number and 
therefore we cannot say that/(x) is infinite when x = 0. Hence we say 
only that /(x) ^^tends to infinity^^ as x approaches zero. 

A still different type of discontinuity appears in the function u = 
sin (1/x) at the point x = 0, as is apparent from the graph of that 
function (Fig. 156). 

The preceding examples exhibit several ways in which a function can 
fail to be continuous at a point x = Xi : 

1) It may be possible to make the function continuous at x = Xi by 
properly defining or redefining its value when x = Xi. For example, 
the function u = x/x is constantly equal to 1 when x 7 ^ 0; it is not 
defined for x = 0, since 0/0 is a meaningless symbol. But if we agree 
in this case that the value u — I shall also correspond to the value 
X = 0, then the function so extended becomes continuous for every 
value of X without exception. The same effect is produced if we redefine 
f(0) = 0 for the function defined at the bottom of the preceding page. 
A discontinuity of this kind is said to be removable. 

2) Different limits may be approached by the function as x ap¬ 
proaches Xi from the right and from the left, as in Figure 157. 

3) Even one-sided limits may not exist, as in Figure 156. 



286 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VII 


4) The function may tend to infinity as x approaches , as in 
Figure 158. 

Discontinuities of the last three types are said to be essential; they 
cannot be removed by properly defining or redefining the function at 
the point a: = Xi alone. 


X — I X* 


X* * X* -f (x» - l)(x» + 1) 


Exercises: 1) Plot the functions - —r-. -r—r. rr- ^. , ~ ."r r and find their 

discontinuities. 

2) Plot the functions x sin ~ and x* sin - and verify that they are continuous 

X X 

at X 0, if one defines u 0 for x « 0, in both cases. 

*3) Show that the function arc tan - has a discontinuity of the second type 

X 

(jump) at X = 0. 


*^6. Functions of Several Variables 

We return to our systematic discussion of the function concept. If 
the independent variable P is a point in the plane with coordinates x, y, 
and if to each such point P corresponds a single number u —for example, 
u might be the distance of the point P from the origin—then we usually 
write 

w = f(x, y). 

This notation is also used if, as often happens, two quantities x and y 
appear from the outset as independent variables. For example, the 
pressure u of a gas is a function of the volume x and the temperature y^ 
and the area of a triangle is a function u = /(x, t/, z) of the lengths 
X, y, and z of its three sides. 

In the same way that a graph gives a geometrical representation of a 
function of one variable, a geometrical representation of a function 
u = /(x, y) of two variables is afforded by a surface in the three-dimen¬ 
sional space with x, y, u as coordinates. To each point x, y in the 
X, 2/-plane we assign the point in space whose coSrdinates are x, 2/, and 
V)* Thus the function u = \/1 — x* — is represented by a 
spherical surface with the equation w* + x* + y* = 1, the linear func¬ 
tion u = ax + 5y + cbya plane, the function w = xy by a hyperbolic 
paraboloid, etc. 

A different representation of the function u = /(x, y) may be given 
in the x, y-plane alone by means of contour lines. Instead of considering 
the three-dimensional ‘landscape^^ u = /(x, y), we draw, as on a contour 
map, the level curves of the function, indicating the projections on the 
X, v-plane of all points with equal vertical elevation u. These level 



FUNCTIONS OF SEVERAL VARIADLES 


287 


curves are simply the curves f(x, y) — c, where c remains constant for 
each curve. Thus the function u = x + y ia characterized by Figure 



Fig. 161. A surface u * fix, y). Fio. 162. The corresponding level curvee. 



Fig. 163. Level curves of u *■ x + y. 


163. The level curves of a spherical surface 
are a set of concentric circles. The func¬ 
tion u ^ X + representing a paraboloid of 
revolution is likewise characterized by circles 
(Fig. 165). By numbers attached to the 
different curves one may indicate the height 
u = c. 

Functions ^of several variables occur in 
physics when the motion of a continuous 
substance is to be described. For example, 
suppose a string is stretched between two 
points on the x-axis and then deformed so that 


the particle with the position z is moved a certain distance perpendicu¬ 


larly to the axis. If the string is then released, it will vibrate in such 
a way that the particle with the original coordinate x will have at the 



288 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VI] 


time t a distance u = /(x, t) from the x-axis. The motion is completely 
described as soon as the function u — f(x, t) is known. 


U 



Fig. IM. Paraboloid of revolution. Fig. 165. The correeponding level curves. 

The definition of continuity given for functions of a single variable 
carries over directly to functions of several variables. A function 
u = f(Xf y) is said to be continuous at the poii^t x ^ Xi,y — yi]if{Xf y) 
always approaches the value /(xi, ^i) when the point x, y approaches 
the point Xi, yi from any direction or in any way whatever. 

There is, however, one important difference between functions of one 
and of several variables. In the latter case the concept of an inverse 
function becomes meaningless, since we cannot solve an equation u = 
/(x, y), e.g. w = X + y, in such a way that each of the independent 
quantities x and y can be expressed in terms of the one quantity w. But 
this difference in the aspect of functions of one and of several variables 
disappears if we emphasize the idea of a function as defining a mapping 
or transformation. 

*7. Functions and Transformations 

A correspondence between the points of one line characterized by a 
codrdinate x along the line, and the points of another line Z', character¬ 
ized by a coordinate x', is simply a function x' = /(x). In case the 
correspondence is biunique we also have an inverse function x = fi^(x'). 
The simplest example is a transformation by projection, which—we 
state here without proof—^is characterized in general by a function of 
the form x* = /(x) = (ox + 6)/(cx + d), where a, b, c, d, are constants. 
In this case, the inverse function is x = g(x^) = (—dx' + b)/{cx' — a). 

Mappings in two dimensions from a plane ir with coordinates x, y 


FUNCTIONS AND TRANSFORMATIONS 


289 


onto a plane t' with coordinates x', y* cannot be represented by a single 
function x' == /(x), but require two functions of two variables: 

= /(iP, y), 

y' = y)- 

For example, a projective transformation is given by a function system, 

^ ax + by + c 

yx + % + fc' 

, ^ dx + ey +S 
gx + hy + k' 

where a, 6, • • • , A; are constants, and where x, y and x', y' are coordi¬ 
nates in the two planes respectively. From this point of view the idea of 
an inverse transformation makes sense. We simply have to solve this 
system of equations for x and y in terms of x' and y'. Geometrically, 
this amounts to finding the inverse mapping of ir' onto tt. This will be 
uniquely defined, provided the correspondence between the points of 
the two planes is biunique. 

The transformations of the plane studied in topology are given, not 
by simple algebraic equations, but by any system of functions, 

= fix, y), 
y' = gix, y), 

that define a biunique and bicontinuous transformation. 

Exercises: *1) Show that the transformation of inversion (Chapter III, p. 141) 
in the unit circle is given analytically by the equations x' = x/(x* + 
y' = y/{x^ + y*). Find the inverse transformation. Prove analytically that 
inversion transforms the totality of lines and circles into lines and circles. 

2) Prove that by a transformation x' = (ax -f b)/{cx + d) four points of the 
x-axis are transformed into four points of the x'-axis with the same cross-ratio. 
(See p. 175.) 


§2. LIMITS 

1. The Limit of a Sequence Un 

As we have seen in §1, the description of the continuity of a function 
is based on the limit concept. Up to now we have used this concept 
in a more or less intuitive form. In this and the following sections we 
shall consider it in a more systematic way. Since sequences are rather 



290 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVl) 


simpler than functions of a continuous variable, we shall begin with a 
study of sequences. 

In Chapter II we encountered sequences a« of numbers and studied 
their limits as n increases indefinitely or “tends to infinity.” For ex¬ 
ample, the sequence whose nth term is Un = 1/n, 


( 1 ) 


1 , 


1 1 
2’3' 


1 

n’ 


f 


has the limit 0 for increasing n: 

(2) - —> 0 as n 00 . 

n 


Let us try to state exactly what is meant by this. As we go out farther 
and farther in the sequence, the terms become smaller and smaller. 
After the 100th term all the terms are smaller than 1/100, after the 
1000th term all the terms are smaller than 1/1000, and so on. None of 
the terms is actually equal to 0. But if we go out far enough in the 
sequence (1), we can be sure that each of its terms will differ from 0 
by as little as we please. 

The only trouble with this explanation is that the meaning of the 
italicized phrases is not entirely clear. How far is *ffar enough/^ and how 
little is “as little as we please^7 If we can attach a precise meaning 
to these phrases then we can give a precise meaning to the limiting 
relation (2). 

A geometric interpretation will help to make the situation clearer. 
If we represent the terms of the sequence (1) by their corresponding 
points on the number axis we observe that the terms of the sequence 
appear to cluster around the point 0. Let us choose any interval I on 
the number axis with center at the point 0 and total width 2€, so that 
the interval extends a distance e on each side of the point 0. If we 
choose € = 10, then, of course, all the terms an — I fn of the sequence 
will lie inside the interval I. If we choose e = 1/10, then the first few 
terms of the sequence will lie outside /, but all the terms from an cn, 

L L L L 

ir 12’ 13’ 14’ ’ 

will lie within I. Even if we choose t = 1/1000, only the first thou¬ 
sand terms of the sequence will fail to lie within /, while from the term 
aiooi on, all the infinitely many terms 


Aiooi I aiooi , aioot» «* • 



LIMIT OF A SEQUENCE a, 


291 


will lie within /. Clearly, this reasoning holds for any positive number c: 
as soon as a positive € is chosen, no matter how small it may be, we can 
then find an integer N so large that 


From this it follows that all the terms an of the sequence for which 
n> N will lie within /, and only the finite number of terms ai, 02 , • • • , 
as-i can lie outside. The important point is this: First the width of 
the interval I is assigned at pleasure by choosing €. Then a suitable 
integer N can be found. This process of first choosing a number 6 and 
then finding a suitable integer N can be carried out for any positive 
number €, no matter how small, and gives a precise meaning to the 
statement that all the terms of the sequence (1) will differ from 0 by 
as little as we please, provided we go out far enough in the sequence. 

To summarize: Let € be any positive number. Then we can find an 
integer N such that all the terms an of the sequence (1) for which n> N 
will lie within the interval I of total width 2€ and with center at the 
point 0. This is the precise meaning of the limiting relation (2). 

On the basis of this example we are now ready to give an exact defini¬ 
tion of the general statement: ^The sequence of real numbers ai, 02 , 
03 , • • • has the limit o.” We include o in the interior of an interval I 
of the number axis: if the interval is small, some of the numbers an may 
lie outside the interval, but as soon as n becomes sufficiently large, say 
greater than or equal to some integer iV, then all the numbers an for 
which n > N must lie within the interval 1. Of course, the integer N 
may have to be taken very large if a very small interval I is chosen, 
but no matter how small the interval /, such an integer N must exist 
if the sequence is to have a as its limit. 

The fact that a sequence On has the limit a is expressed symbolically 
by writing 

lim On = a as n 00 , 

or simply 


an'-* a as n —» 00 

(read: On tends to a, or converges to a). The definition of the convergence 
of a sequence an to a may be formulated more concisely as follows: The 
sequence ai, a 2 , a^, • • • has the limit a as n tends to infinity ifi corre- 



292 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VII 


spending to any positive number €, no matter how small, there may be 
found an integer N {depending on €), such that 

(3) I a - an I < € 

for aU 

n > N, 

This is the abstract formulation of the notion of the limit of a se¬ 
quence. Small wonder that when confronted with it for the first time 
one may not fathom it in a few minutes. There is an unfortunate, 
almost snobbish attitude on the part of some writers of textbooks, who 
present the reader with this definition without a thorough preparation, 
as though an explanation were beneath the dignity of a mathematician. 

The definition suggests a contest between two persons, A and B. 
A sets the requirement that the fixed quantity a should be approached 
by On with a degree of accuracy better than a chosen margin c = ci ; 
B meets the requirement by demonstrating that there is a certain integer 
AT = iVi such that all the a„ after the element Oat^ satisfy the €i-requirc- 
ment. Then A may become more exacting and set a new, smaller, 
margin, € = € 2 . B again meets his demand by finding a (perhaps much 
larger) integer N — Ni, IfB can satisfy A no matter how small A sets 
his margin, then we have the situation expressed by Sin —> h. 

There is a definite psychological difliculty in grasping this precise 
definition of limit. Our intuition suggests a ^^dynamic^' idea of a limit 
as the result of a process of ‘‘motion^': we move on through the row of 
integers 1, 2, 3, • • • , n, • • • and then observe the behavior of the se¬ 
quence On. We feel that the approach On —> a should be observable. 
But this *‘naturar^ attitude is not capable of clear mathematical formu¬ 
lation. To arrive at a precise definition we must reverse the order of 
steps; instead of first looking at the independent variable n and then at the 
dependent variable On , we must base our definition on what we have to 
do if we wish actually to check the statement On —> o. In such a pro¬ 
cedure we must first choose an arbitrarily small margin around a and 
then determine whether we can meet this condition by taking the inde¬ 
pendent variable n sufficiently large. Then, by giving symbolic names, 
€ and N, to the phrases ‘‘arbitrarily small margin^' and “sufficiently 
large we are led to the precise definition of limit. 

As another example, let us consider the sequence 

1 2 3 4 n 



LIMIT OF A SEQUENCE a,. 


293 


where an = ^ state that lim an = 1. If you choose an interval 

whose center is the point 1 and for which e = 1/10, then I can satisfy 
your requirement (3) by choosing N = 10; for 


0 < 1 - 


n 

n + 1 


n + 1 — n_ 1 

n + 1 nTl ^ 10 


as soon as n > 10. If you strengthen your demand by choosing € = 
1/1000, then again I can meet it by choosing N = 1000; and similarly 
for any positive number €, no matter how small, which you may choose; 
in fact, I need only choose any integer N greater than 1 /e. This 
process of assigning an arbitrarily small margin € about the number a 
and then proving that the terms of the sequence an are all within a dis¬ 
tance € of a if we go far enough out in the sequence, is the detailed 
description of the fact that lim an = a. 

If the members of the sequence ai, 02 , aa, • • • are expressed as infinite 
decimals, then the statement lim an = a simply means that for any 
positive integer m the first m digits of an coincide with the first m digits 
of the infinite decimal expansion of the fixed number a, provided that n 
is chosen sufficiently large, say greater than or equal to some value N 
(depending on m). This merely corresponds to choices of e of the 
form 10”'”. 

There is another, quite suggestive, way of expressing the limit concept. 
If lim an — a, and if we enclose a in the interior of an interval /, then 
no matter how small I may be, all the numbers an for which n is greater 
than or equal to some integer N will lie within /, so that at most a 
finite number, N—1, of terms at the beginning of the sequence. 


ai, 02, • • • , a^f^i , 

can lie outside I. If I is very small, N may be very large, say a hundred 
or even a thousand billion; still only a finite number of terms of the 
sequence will lie outside I, while the infinitely many remaining terms 
will lie within 7. 

We may say of the members of any infinite sequence that ‘‘almost all'' 
have a certain property if only a finite number, no matter how great, 
do not have the property. For example “almost all" positive integers 
are greater than 1,000,000,000,000. Using this terminology, the state¬ 
ment lim an = a is equivalent to the statement: If I is any interval with a 
as its center, then almost all of the numbers an lie within I. 

It should be noted in passing that it is not necessarily assumed that 
all the terms an of a sequence have different values. It is permissible for 



294 


FUNC5T10NS AND LIMITS 


I VII 


some, infinitely many, or even aU the numbers o» to be equal to the 
limit value a. For example, the sequence for which ai = 0, a* = 0, • • • , 
o« = 0, • • • is a legitimate sequence, and its limit, of course, is 0, 

A sequence an with a limit a is called convergent. A sequence an 
without a limit is called divergent. 


Exercises: Prove: 

1. The sequence for which an ** -- has the limit 0. 

n* + 1 


is less than - and greater than 0.) 
n 


2. The sequence an 


n* + 1 

——has the limit 0. (Hint: an 
n* + 1 


(Hint: an 





lies between 


0 and ~.) 
n 


3. The sequence 1, 2, 3, 4, ••• and the oscillating sequences 

2 , 1 , 2 , 1 , 2 , • •• , 

-1, 1, -1, 1, -1, (i.e. a„ = (-in 

and 1, 1, i, 1, i, 1, }, ••• 

do not have limits. 


If in a sequence an the members become so large that eventually an 
is larger than any preassigned number K, then we say that an tends to 
infinity and write lim Un = <», or Un oo . For example, —> oo and 
2"* —> 00 . This terminology is useful, though perhaps not quite con¬ 
sistent, because oo is not considered to be a number a, A sequence 
tending to infinity is still called divergent. 


Exercise: Prove that the sequence an 


n« + 1 
n 


tends to infinity; similarly 


. n* + 1 

for an - ——• 
n + 1 


n* — 1 

n + r 


and On 


n** 

n*+1’ 


Beginners sometimes fall into the error of thinking that a passage to 
the limit as n —► oo may be performed simply by substituting n = oo 
in the expression for an . For example, 1/n —> 0 because “l/oo = 0.*' 
But the symbol oo is not a number^ and its use in the expression l/oo 
is illegitimate. Trying to imagine the limit of a sequence as the ^^ulti- 



LIMIT OF A SEQUENCE a, 295 

mate” or ‘‘last” term an when n = oo misses the point and obscures the 
issue. 


2. Monotone Sequences 

In the general definition of page 291, no specific type of approach of a 
convergent sequence oi, 02 , • to its limit a is required. The 

simplest type is exhibited by a so-called monotone sequence, such as 
the sequence 


12 3 
2 ’ 3 ^ 4 ' 


n 


'n+l* 

Each term of this sequence is greater than the preceding term. For 
n+ 1 


Un+l “ 


= 1 - 


1 


> 1 


n 


= an 


A sequence 


fi 2 u 2 7i-l“l ?i-f*l 

of this sort, where Un+i > On, is said to be monotone increasing. Simi¬ 
larly, a sequence for which an > On+i 1 such as the sequence 1, 1/2, 
1/3, • • • , is called monotone decreasing. Such sequences can approach 
their limits from one side only. In contrast to these, there are sequences 
that oscillate, such as the sequence —1, +1/2, —1/3, +1/4, ••• . 
This sequence approaches its limit 0 from both sides (see Fig. 11, p. 69). 

The behavior of a monotone sequence is especially easy to determine. 
Such a sequence may have no limit, but run away completely, like the 
sequence 

1,2, 3, 4, ... , 

where an = n, or the sequence 


2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, ... , 

where an is the nth prime number, pn . In this case the sequence tends 
to infinity. But if the terms of a monotone increasing sequence remain 
bounded—that is, if every term is less than an upper bound 5, known 
in advance—then it is intuitively clear that the sequence must tend to a 
certain limit a which will be less than or at most equal to B, We 



1 


<*2 <*3 « 

Fig. 166. Monotone bounded sequence. 

1 

B 


formulate this as the Principle of Monotone Sequences: Any mon(h 
tone increasing sequence that has an upper bound must converge to a limit. 
(A similar statement holds for any monotone decreasing sequence with a 



296 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VII 

lower bound.) It is remarkable that the value of the limit a need not 
be given or known in advance; the theorem states that under the pre¬ 
scribed conditions the limit exists. Of course, this theorem depends on 
the introduction of irrational numbers and would otherwise not always 
be true; for, as we have seen in Chapter II, any irrational number (such 
as \/2) is the limit of the monotone increasing and bounded sequence 
of rational decimal fractions obtained by breaking off a certain infinite 
decimal at the nth digit. 

* Although the principle of monotone sequences appeals to the intuition as an 
obvious truth, it will be instructive to give a rigorous proof in the modern fashion. 
To do this we must show that the principle is a logical consequence of the defini¬ 
tions of real number and limit. 

Suppose that the numbers ai, 02 , Os, • • • form a monotone increasing but 
bounded sequence. We can express the terms of this sequence as infinite decimals, 

ai * Ai.piptpt ••• , 
cii At.qiQiqt * • • , 
ai *» Ai.fifiri ••• , 


where the Ai are integers and the , etc. are digits from 0 to 9. Now run 

down the column of integers Ai , Ai, Aj, ••• . Since the sequence ai, 02 , 
ai, • • • is bounded, these integers cannot increase indefinitely, and since the 
sequence is monotone increasing, the sequence of integers Ai, A 2 , Aa, ••• will 
remain constant after attaining its maximum value. Call this maximum value A, 
and suppose that it is attained at the A^oth row. Now run down the second 
column pi, q\ , f\, ••• , confining attention to the terms of the A^oth and sub¬ 
sequent rows. If X\ is the largest digit to appear in this column after the iVoth 
row, then xi will appear constantly after its first appearance, which we may sup¬ 
pose to occur in the Nith row, where Ni > No * For if the digit in this column 
decreased at any time thereafter, the sequence oi, 02 , oj, • • • would not be mono¬ 
tone increasing. Next we consider the digits P 2 , 5 ^ 2 , ^ 2 , • • • of the third column. 
A similar argument shows that after a certain integer Nt > N\ the digits of the 
third column are constantly equal to some digit x^. If we repeat this process 
for the 4th, 5th, • • • columns we obtain digits Xo, Xa , Xo, • • • and corresponding 
integers Nt, Ni, No, ••• , It is easy to see that the number 

a *■ A.XiXtXtXi • • • 

is the limit of the sequence ai , 02 , a*, • • • . For if 6 is chosen > lO""*, then for 
all n ^ Nm the integral part and first m places of digits after the decimal point 
in an will coincide with those of a, so that the difference | a — On | cannot exceed 
10“"*. Since this can be done for any positive c, however small, by choosing m 
sufficiently large, the theorem is proved. 

It is also possible to prove this theorem on the basis of any one of the other 
definitions of real numbers given in Chapter II; for example, the definition by 
nested intervals or by Dedekind cuts. Such proofs are to be found in most texts 
on advanced calculus. 




MONOTONE SEQUENCES 


297 


The principle of monotone sequences could have been used in Chapter II to 
define the sum and product of two positive infinite decimals, 

CL ^ A. tCLiCL^z ' ' * » 

6 “ J9.&1&3&S • • • . 

Two such expressions cannot be added or multiplied in the ordinary way, starting 
from the right-hand end, for there is no such end. (As an example, the reader may 
try to add the two infinite decimals 0.333333 • • • and 0.989898 • • • .) But if Xn 
denotes the finite decimal fraction obtained by breaking off the expressions for 
a and h at the nth place and adding in the ordinary way, then the sequence xi, Xa, 
Xs , • • • will be monotone increasing and bounded (by the integer A -f B + 2, 
for example). Hence this sequence has a limit, and we may define o + 6 «« lim Xn . 
A similar process serves to define the product ah. These definitions can then be 
extended by the ordinary rules of arithmetic to cover all cases, where a and b are 
positive or negative. 

Exercise: Show in this way that the sum of the two infinite decimals considered 
above is the real number 1.323232 • • • = 131/99. 

The importance of the limit concept in mathematics lies in the fact 
that many numbers are defined only as limits —often as limits of mono¬ 
tone bounded sequences. This is why the field of rational numbers, in 
which such limits may not exist, is too narrow for the needs of 
mathematics. 


3. Euler’s Number e 


The number e has had an established place in mathematics alongside 
the Archimedean number tt ever since the publication in 1748 of Euler^s 
Introductio in Analysin Infinitorum, It provides an excellent illustra¬ 
tion of how the principle of monotone sequences can serve to define a 
new real number. Using the abbreviation 

nl = 1*2«3*4 • • • n 


for the product of the first n integers, we consider the sequence 
ai f 02 y as f ••• y where 


(4) 


= + ^ + 




The terms On form a monotone increasing sequence, since On+i originates 
from On by the addition of the positive increment • Moreover, 


the values of On are bounded above: 

(5) an < 5 == 3. 


(n + 1)!* 


For we have 


1 11 1^11 1 _ 1 
«l 23"‘i^22*“2 2*-*’ 




298 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVII 


and hence 

o» <1 + 1 + 2 +22+ ^ + --- +^, - 1 + -fr-f- 

= 1 + 2(1 - (i)") < 3, 

using the formula given on page 13 for the sum of the first n terms of a 
geometric series. Hence, by the principle of monotone sequences, an 
must approach a limit as n tends to infinity, and this limit we call e. 
To express the fact that e = lim an , we may write e as the * infinite 
series’’ 


( 6 ) 


" = ^ + ri + 


+ n! + 


This “equality,” with a row of dots at the end, is simply another way 
of expressing the content of the two statements 


= 1 + ^ + |, + 




and 


a„ e as n —» 00 . 

The series (6) permits the calculation of e to any desired degree of 
accuracy. For example, the sum (to nine digits) of the terms in (6) 
up to and including 1/12! is S = 2.71828183 • • • . (The reader should 
check this result.) The “error,” i.e. the difference between this value 
and the true value of e can easily be appraised. We have for the differ¬ 
ence (e — 2) the expression 

i^! 14! 13'! r3 l3* ■ 

_ 1 1 _ 1 
131’ J_ 12.12!' 

13 

This is so small that it cannot affect the ninth digit of 2. Hence, allow¬ 
ing for a possible error in the last figure of the value given above, we 
have e = 2.7182818, to eight digits. 

* The number e is irrational. To prove this we shall proceed indirectly by as¬ 
suming that e p/q, where p and q are integers, and then deducing an absurdity 
from this assumption. Since we know that 2 < e < 3, e cannot be an integer. 



EULER'S NUMBER e 


299 


and therefore q must be at least equal to 2 . Now we multiply both sides of ( 6 ) 
by 5 ! “ 2*3 ••• 9 , obtaining 

- p*2*3 ••• (5 — 1 ) 

jyj « [gl + gl + 3*4 • • • g + 4-6 • • • 3 4- * • • + (g — 1)^ + ^ + 1] 

. 1 , 1 . 

(g+ 1 ) (q+l)(g + 2) • 

On the left side we obviously have an integer. On the right side, the term in 
brackets is likewise an integer. The remainder of the right side, however, is a 
positive number that is less than § and hence no integer. For q >2, and hence 
the terms of the series \/{q 4 - 1 ) -f • •• are respectively not greater than the 
corresponding terms of the geometrical series 1/3 4- 1/3* 4- 1/3* 4- • • • , whose 
sum is 1/3[1/(1 — 1/3)] *■ }. Hence (7) presents a contradiction: the integer on 
the left side cannot be equal to the number on the right side; for this latter num¬ 
ber, being the sum of an integer and a positive number less than is not an 
integer. 

4. The Number tt 

As is known from school mathematics, the length of the circumference 
of a circle of unit radius can be defined as the limit of a sequence of 
lengths of regular polygons with an increasing number of sides. The 
length of the circumference so defined is denoted by 27r. More precisely, 
if Pn denotes the length of the inscribed, and qn the length of the circum¬ 
scribed regular n-sided polygon, then pn < < qn . Moreover, as n 

increases, each of the sequences Pn , qn approaches 27r monotonically, 
and with each step we obtain a smaller margin for the error in the 
approximation of 27r given by pn or qn . 

On page 124 we found the expression 

P 2 m = 2”*\/2 — \/2 + y /'2 4 - • • • 

containing m — 1 nested square root signs. 

This formula can be used to compute the ap¬ 
proximate value of 27r. 

Exercises: 1. Find the approximate value of ir 
given by P 4 , Ps , and pw . 

2. Find a formula for gjm. 

* 3. Use this formula to find 74 , Qi ^ and q\t . 

From a knowledge of pn and qn , state bounds between which tt must lie. 

What is the number w? The inequality pn < 2ir < qn gives the com¬ 
plete answer by setting up a sequence of nested intervals which close 
down on the point 27r. Still, this answer leaves something to be de- 



Fig. 167. Circle approximated 
by polygons. 


300 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VI] 


sired, for it gives no information about the nature of tt as a real number: 
is it rational or irrational, algebraic or transcendental? As we have 
mentioned on page 140, t is in fact a transcendental number, and hence 
irrational. In contrast to the proof for e, the proof of the irrationality 
of T, first given by J. H. Lambert (1728-1777), is rather difficult and 
will not be undertaken here. However, other information about t is 
within our reach. Recalling the statement that the integers are the basic 
material of mathematics, we may ask whether the number w has any 
simple relationship to the integers. The decimal expansion of tt, al¬ 
though it has been calculated to several hundred places, reveals no trace 
of regularity. This is not surprising, since w and 10 have nothing to do 
with one another. But in the eighteenth century Euler and others 
found beautiful expressions linking tt to the integers by means of infinite 
series and products. Perhaps the simplest such formula is the following; 



expressing 7r/4 as the limit for increasing 7 i of the partial sums 



+ (-ir 


2 n+ 1 


We shall derive this formula in Chapter VIII. Another infinite series 
for V is 


1 = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 

5 12 ^ 22 ^ 32 42 ^ 52 62 ^ 


Still another striking expression for tt was discovered by the English 
mathematician John Wallis (1616-1703). His formula states that 

/224466 2n 2n\ tt 
\l 3 3 5 5 7 2n - 1 271+ 1/ 2 

This is sometimes written in the abbreviated form 


7r_22446688 

2 r3’3'5'5'7’7’9 

the expression on the right being called an infinite product. 

A proof of the last two formulas will be found in any comprehensive 
book on the calculus (see p. 482 and pp. 509-510). 




CONTINUED FRACTIONS 


301 


*5. Continued Fractions 


Iii.teresting limiting processes occur in connection with continued 
fractions. A finite continued fraction, such as 



1 


2 + 



represents a rational number. On page 49 we showed that every ra¬ 
tional number can be written in this form by means of the Euclidean 
algorithm. For irrational numbers, however, the algorithm does not 
stop after a finite number of steps. Instead, it leads to a sequence of 
fractions of increasing length, each representing a rational number. In 
particular, all real algebraic numbers (see p. 103) of degree 2 may be 
expressed in this way. Consider, for example, the number x = \/2 — 1, 
which is a root of the quadratic equation 


+ 2x = 1, or X = 

If on the right side x is again replaced by 1/(2 + x) this yields the 
expression 


X 


1 


2 + 


1 ' 
2 + X 


and then 


X = 


2 + 


2 + 


2 + x 


and so on, so that after n steps we obtain the equation 


X = 


2 + 


2 + 


2 + 


• 1 
2 + xl 


n steps. 



302 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VI] 


As n tends to infinity, we obtain the “infinite continued fraction” 


V2= 1 + 


2 + 


2 + 


2 + 


2 + . 


This remarkable formula connects \/2 with the integers in a much 
more striking way than does the decimal expansion of ■\/2, which dis¬ 
plays no regularity in the succession of its digits. 

For the positive root of any quadratic equation of the form 


X — ax + or X = a ■]—, 

X 


we obtain the expansion 

X = a + 


a + 


a + 


a + 


For example, setting o = 1, we find 

a; = Kl + V5) = 1 + 


1 + 


1 + 


1 + . 


(cf. p. 123). These examples are special cases of a general theorem 
which states that the real roots of quadratic equations with integral co¬ 
efficients have -periodic continued fraction developments, just as rational 
numbers have periodic decimal expansions. 

Euler was able to find almost equally simple infinite continued 
fractions for e and ir. The following are exhibited without proof: 


e = 2 -b 


1 + 


2 - 1 - 


1 + 


1 + 


4-1- 


1 + 


1 + 


6+ . 



CONTINUED FRACTIONS 


303 


e= 2 + 


6 + . 


2 + . 


§3. LIMITS BY CONTINUOUS APPROACH 


1. Introduction. General Definition 

In §2, Article 1 we succeeded in giving a precise formulation of the 
statement, “The sequence a„ (i.e. the function a„ = F(n) of the integral 
variable n) has the limit a as n tends to infinity.” We shall now give a 
corresponding definition of the statement, “The function w = f(x) of 
the continuous variable x has the limit a as x tends to the value Xi 
In an intuitive form this concept of limit by continuous approach of 
the independent variable * was used in §1, Article 5 to test the con¬ 
tinuity of the function f(x). 

Again let us begin with a particular example. The function 

(X I 

f(x) = —- is defined for all values of x other than x = 0, where the 

X 

denominator vanishes. If we draw a graph of the function u = f(x) 
for values of x in the neighborhood of 0, it is evident that as x “ap¬ 
proaches” 0 from either side the corresponding value of u = /(x) “ap¬ 
proaches” the limit 1. In order to give a precise description of this 
fact, let us find an explicit formula for the difference between the value 
f(x) and the fixed number 1: 


fix) - 1 = 


X -t- x’ 


-1 = 


X -I- X - X 



304 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVIJ 


If we agree to consider only values of x near 0, but not the value a: = 0 
itself (for which/(*) is not even defined), we may divide both numerator 
and denominator of the expression on the right side of this equation by 
X, obtaining the simpler formula 

f{x) — 1 = X*. 



Clearly, we can make this difference os smaU os we please by confining 
a: to a sufficiently small neighborhood of the value 0. Thus for x = 

'<*> - ' “ ‘ = ipoo’“‘* 

generally, if € is any positive number, no matter how small, then the 
difference between f(x) and 1 will be smaller than €, provided only that 
the distance of x from 0 is less than the number 8 = y/e. For if 

I X I < \/« 

then 

|/(x) - 1 I = |x’ |< e. 

The analogy with our definition of limit for a sequence is complete. 
On page 291 we made the definition, “The sequence o„ has the limit o 
as n tends to infinity if, corresponding to every positive number «, no 
matter how small, there may be found an integer N (depending on e) 
such that 

I o« — o I < • 

for all n satisfying the inequality 

n > NJ* 

In the case of a function f(x) of a continuous variable x as x tends to a 
finite value Xi, we merely replace the “sufficiently large” n given by 



INTRODUCTION 


305 


N by the ‘‘suflSciently near’’ xi given by a number 5, and arrive at the 
following definition of limit by continuous approach, first given by 
Cauchy around 1820: The function f(x) has the limit a as x tends to the 
value Xi if, corresponding to every positive number €, no matter how small^ 
there may he found a positive number 6 {depending on e) such that 

1 /(x) - a I < € 

for all X 7 ^ Xi satisfying the inequality 

I X — Xi 1 < 6. 

When this is the case we write 

fix) —> a as X —» a?!. 

In the case of the function fix) = ix x^)/x we showed above that 
fix) has the limit 1 as x tends to the value Xi = 0. In this case it was 
sufficient always to choose h = y/ 

2. Remarks on the Limit Concept 

The (€, 6)-definition of limit is the result of more than a hundred 
years of trial and error, and embodies in a few words the result of per¬ 
sistent effort to put this concept on a sound mathematical basis. Only 
by limiting processes can the fundamental notions of the calculus— 
derivative and integral—be defined. But a clear understanding and a 
precise definition of limits had long been blocked by an apparently 
insurmountable difficulty. 

In their study of motion and change the mathematicians of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries accepted as a matter of course 
the concept of a quantity x steadily changing and moving in a contin¬ 
uous flow toward a limiting value Xi . Associated with this primary flow 
of time or of a quantity x behaving like time they considered a sec¬ 
ondary value u = fix) that followed the motion of x. The problem 
was to attach a precise mathematical meaning to the idea that fix) 
‘Tends to” or “approaches” a fixed value o as x moves toward xi . 

But from the time of Zeno and his paradoxes the intuitive physical 
or metaphysical concept of continuous motion has eluded all attempts 
at an exact mathematical formulation. There is no difficulty in proceed¬ 
ing step by step through a discrete sequence of values ai, 02 , as ,.... 
But in dealing with a continuous variable x that ranges over a whole 
interval of the number axis it is impossible to say how x shall “approach” 
the fixed value Xi in such a way as to assume consecutively and in their 
order of magnitude all the values in the interval. For the points on a 
line form a dense set, and there is no “next” point after a given point 



306 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVI] 


has been reached. Certainly, the intuitive idea of a continuum has a 
psychological reality in the human mind. But it cannot be called upon 
to resolve a mathematical impossibility; there must remain a discrep¬ 
ancy between the intuitive idea and the mathematical language 
designed to describe the scientifically relevant features of our intuition 
in exact logical terms. Zeno’s paradoxes are a pointed indication of this 
discrepancy. 

Cauchy’s achievement was to realize that, as far as the mathematical 
concepts are concerned, any reference to a prior intuitive idea of con¬ 
tinuous motion may and even must be omitted. As happens so often, 
the path to scientific progress was opened by resigning an attempt in a 
metaphysical direction and instead operating solely with notions that 
in principle correspond to ^^observable” phenomena. If we analyze 
what we really mean by the words ^'continuous approach,” how we must 
proceed to verify it in a specific case, then we are forced to accept a 
definition such as Cauchy’s. This definition is static; it does not pre¬ 
suppose the intuitive idea of motion. On the contrary, only such a 
static definition makes possible a precise mathematical analysis of con¬ 
tinuous motion in time, and disposes of Zeno’s paradoxes as far as 
mathematical science is concerned. 

In the (e, 5)-definition the independent variable does not move; it 
does not "tend to” or "approach” a limit Xi in any physical sense. 
These phrases and the symbol —> still remain, and no mathematician 
need or should lose the suggestive intuitive feeling that they express. 
But when it comes to checking the existence of a limit in actual scientific 
procedure it is the (e, 6)-definition that must be applied. Whether 
this definition corresponds satisfactorily with the intuitive "dynamic” 
notion of approach is a question of the same sort as whether the axioms 
of geometry provide a satisfactory description of the intuitive concept 
of space. Both formulations leave out something that is real to the 
intuition, but they provide an adequate mathematical framework for 
expressing our knowledge of these concepts. 

As in the case of sequential limit, the key to Cauchy’s definition lies 
in the reversal of the "natural” order in which the variables are con¬ 
sidered. First we fix our attention on a margin e for the dependent vari¬ 
able, and then we seek to determine a suitable margin S for the inde¬ 
pendent variable. The statement "/(x) —> a as x —> Xi” is only a brief 
way of saying that this can be done for every positive number e. In 
particular, no part of this statement, e.g. "x —> xi” has a meaning by 
itself. 



REMARKS ON LIMIT CONCEPT 


307 


One more point should be stressed. In letting x ‘'tend to^' X\ we may 
permit x to be greater than or less than Xi, but we expressly exclude 
equality by requiring that x 5 *^ Xi: x tends to Xi, but never actually 
assumes the value Xi. Thus we can apply our definition to functions 
that are not defined for x = Xi, but have definite limits as x tends 

X “1” x^ 

to Xi ; e.g. the function/(x) = -considered on page 303. Exclud- 

X 

ing X = Xi corresponds to the fact that, for limits of sequences an as 
n —> 00 , e.g. On = 1 /n, we never substitute n = 00 in the formula. 

However, as x tends to Xi , f(x) may approach the limit a in such a 
way that there are values x xi for which f{x) = a. For example, in 
considering the function /(x) = x/x as x tends to 0 we never allow x to 
equal 0 , but/(x) = 1 for all x 0 and the limit a exiats and is equal to 1 
according to our definition. 


3. The Limit of 


sin X 

X 


If X denotes the radian measure of an angle, then the expression 


sm X 


is defined for all x except x = 0 , where it becomes the meaningless 
symbol 0/0. The reader with access to a table of trigonometric func¬ 


tions will be able to compute the value of 


sm X 


for small values of x. 


These tables are commonly given in terms of the degree measure of 
angles; we recall from § 1 , Article 2 that the degree measure x is related 

IT 

to the radian measure y by the relation x = — y = 0.01745 y, to 5 

loU 

places. From a four-place table we find that for an angle of 


10 “, 

X = 0.1745, 

sin X = 0.1736, 

® - 0.9948 

X 


0.0873, 

0.0872, 

0.9988 

2 », 

0.0349, 

0.0349, 

1.0000 

1 “, 

0.0175, 

0.0175, 

1 . 0000 . 


Although these figures are stated to be accurate only to four places, 
it would appear that 

( 1 ) sin x/x —> 1 

We shall now give a rigorous proof of this limiting relation. 


as X —♦ 0 . 



308 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVIl 


From the unit circle definition of the trigonometric functions, if x 
is the radian measure of angle BOC, for 0 < x < ^ we have 
area of triangle OBC == J.l*sin x 
area of circular sector OBC = i-x (see p. 278) 
area of triangle OB A = J • 1 • tan x. 

Hence 

sin X < X < tan x. 

Dividing by sin x we obtain 



1 < 


1 


sm X cos X 


or 

( 2 ) 


^ sm X ^ - 
cos X < - < 1 . 


Now 1 — cos X = (1 — cos x) 


X 

1 + cos X 


1 


cos^x 


sm X 


1 + cos X 

sin* X. Since sin x < x, this shows that 

(3) 1 — cos X < X*, 
or 

1 — X* < cos X. 

Together with (2), this yields the final inequality 

(4) 


1 + cos X 1 + cos X 


1 - X* < — < 1. 


Although we have been assuming that 0 < x < -, this inequality is 

A 

, , . —T ^ ^ n • (““*) “~sin X sin X , 

also true for - 77 - < x < 0 , since = - = -, and 

2 (— x) —X X 

(-X)* = X*. 

From (4) the limit relation ( 1 ) is an immediate consequence. For 
the difference between and 1 is less than x*, and this can be made 

X 

less than any number e by choosing 1 x | < 6 = 

Exercises: 1) From the inequality (3) deduce the limiting relation ^ 


as X' 



309 


LIMIT OF 22J 

Z 


Find the limits as x —► 0 of the following functions: 


2 ) 

6 ) 


sin* X 

3) 

sin X 

4) 

tan X 

X 

*(* - 1) ■ 

X 

sin ax 

7) 

X Bin X 

8) 

sin X 

sin bx * 

1 — cos X * 

X * 


6 ) 


sin ax 


, if X is measured in degrees. 



1 

tan z 



sin z 


1 

tan x* 


4. Limits as x —> oo 

If the variable x is suflSciently large, then the function f(x) = l/x 
becomes arbitrarily small, or ^^tends to 0,^* In fact, the behavior of 
this function as x increases is essentially the same as that of the sequence 
1/n as n increases. We give the general definition: The function 
f(x) has the limit a as x tends to infinity^ written 

f(x) a as X —> CO ^ 

iff corresponding to each positive number c, no matter how small, there can 
be found a positive number K {depending on c) such that 

\f(x) - a I < « 

provided only that | x | > K. (Compare with the corresponding defini¬ 
tion on p. 305.) 

In the case of the function f(x) = l/x, for which a = 0, it suflSces to 
choose K = l/€, as the reader may at once verify. 

Exercises: 1. Show that the foregoing definition of the statement 


J{z) a as X «c 
18 equivalent to the statement 

J{x) a as l/x —> 0 

Prove that the following limit relations hold: 

x-f 1 


2 . 


X — 1 


1 


. sin X 
4.-► 0 

X 


sin X 


X -f cos X 


as X- 


as X -♦ «. 


- 0 as X 00 . 


^ x2 + X -f 1 , 

3 --- -^1 as X ■ 


6. 

7. 


X* — X — 1 

^-0 
+1 

sin X 


as X -♦ 00 • 


cosx 


has no limit as x - 


8, Define: “/(x) « as x-+ Give an example. 



310 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVI) 

There is one difference between the case of a function f(x) and a sequence an. 
In the case of a sequence, n can tend to infinity only by increasing, but for a 
function we may allow x to become infinite either positively or legatively. If it 
is desired to restrict attention to the behavior of f(x) when x assumes large posi¬ 
tive values only, we may replace the condition | x | > K by the condition x > K; 
for large negative values of x we use the condition x < —K. To symbolize these 
two methods of **one-sided” approach to infinity we write 

X —► 4-00, X —► — 00 

respectively. 

§4. PRECISE DEFINITION OF CONTINUITY 

In §1, Article 5 we stated what amounts to the following criterion for 
the continuity of a function: function/(x) is continuous at the point 

X — xi if, when x approaches Xi , the quantity/(x) approaches the value 
/(xi) as a limit/' If we analyze this definition we see that it consists 
of two different requirements: 

a) the limit a of /(x) must eicist as x tends to Xi, 

b) this limit a must be equal to the value /(xi). 

If in the limit definition of page 305 we set a = /(xi), then the condi¬ 
tion for continuity takes the following form: The function f(x) is con- 
tinuous for the value x = xi i/, corresponding to every positive number e, 
no matter how smallf there may be found a positive number 6 {depending 
on e) such that 

\fix) - /(xi) I < « 
for aUx sati^ying the inequality 

\x — Xi \ < d. 

(The restriction x Xi imposed in the limit definition is unnecessary 
here, since the inequality | /(xi) - f{xi) [ < e is automatically satisfied.) 







PRECISE DEFINITION OF CONTINUITY 


311 


As an example, let us check the continuity of the function/(*) = x* 
at the point Xi = 0, say. We have 


/(*0 = 0 * = 0 . 


Now let us assign any positive value to «, for example 


1 

1000 


Then 


we must show that by confining x to values sufficiently near xi = 0, the 


corresponding values of f{x) will not differ from 0 by more than 


1 

1000 ’ 


i.e. will lie between 


-1 

1000 


and 


1000 ' 


We see immediately that this 


margin is not exceed ed if we restrict x to values differing from xi = 0 
by less than 5 = ^ = 1; for if 1X i < 1, then |/(x) 1 = x* < ^. 


In the same way we can replace e = by e = 10 ^ 10“^, or whatever 

1000 

margin we desire; 8 = will always satisfy the requirement, since 
if 1 X I < then | f{x) | = x* < c. 

On the basis of the (c, 3)-definition of continuity one can show in a 
similar way that all polynomials, rational functions, and trigonometric 
functions are continuous, except for isolated values of x where the func¬ 
tions may become infinite. 

In terms of the graph of a function u = /(x), the definition of con¬ 
tinuity takes the following geometrical form. Choose any positive 
number € and draw parallels to the x-axis at a height /(xi) — € and 
f{xi) + € above it. Then it must be possible to find a positive number 8 
such that the whole portion of the graph which lies within the vertical 
band of width 28 about x\ is also contained within the horizontal band 
of width 2t about/(xi). Figure 170 shows a function which is continuous 
at Xi, while Figure 171 shows a function which is not. In the latter 
case, no matter how narrow we make the vertical band about X \, it 
will always include a portion of the graph that lies outsivle the hori¬ 
zontal band corresponding to the choice of €. 


If I assert that a given function u /(x) is continuous for the value x — Xi, 
it means that I am prepared to fulfill the following contract with you. You may 
choose any positive number c, as small as you please, but fixed. Then I must 
produce a positive number 5 such that | x — Xi | < 6 implies \ f{x) — /(xi) | < «. 
I do not contract to produce at the outset a number $ that will suffice for what¬ 
ever c you may subsequently choose; my choice of d will depend on your choice of «. 
If you can produce but one value c for which 1 cannot provide a suitable 8, then 
my assertion is contradicted. Hence to prove that I can fulfill my contract in 



312 FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS [ VI1 

any concrete case of a function u » f(x), I usually construct an explicit positive 
function 

« - 

defined for every positive number €, for which I can prove that |« — I < 5 
implies always | fix) — f(xi) | < e. In the case of the function u — /(*) — x* 
at the value Xi — 0, the function 8 *■ v>(«) was 8 « 

Exercises: 1) Prove that sin x, cos x are conti nuous fu nctions. 

2) Prove the continuity of 1/(1 + x<) and of y/\ + x*. 

It should now be clear that the (c, 5)-definition of continuity agrees 
with what might be called the observable facts concerning a function. 
As such it is in line with the general principle of modem science that 
sets up as the criterion for the usefulness of a concept or for the ^'scientific 
existence’' of a phenomenon the possibility of its observation (at least 
in principle) or of its reduction to observable facts. 

§5. TWO FUNDAMENTAL THEOREMS ON CONTINUOUS 

FUNCTIONS 

1. Bolzano’s Theorem 

Bernard Bolzano (1781-1848), a Catholic priest trained in scholastic 
philosophy, was one of the first to introduce the modem concept of rigor 
into mathematical analysis. His important booklet, Paradoxien des 
UnendUcheriy appeared in 1850. Here for the first time it was recognized 
that many apparently obvious statements concerning continuous func¬ 
tions can and must be proved if they are to be used in full generality. 
The following theorem on continuous functions of one variable is an 
example. 

A continuous function of a variable x which is positive for some value of x 
and negative for some other value of x in a closed interval a < x < b of 
continuity must have the value zero for some intermediate value of x. Thus, 
if f(x) is continuous as x varies from a to 6, while /(a) < 0 and /(6) > 0, 
then there will exist a value a of x such that a < a < b and /(a) = 0. 

Bolzano’s theorem corresponds perfectly with our intuitive idea of a 
continuous curve, which, in order to get from a point below the x-axis 
to a point above, must somewhere cross the axis. That this need not 
be tme of discontinuous functions is shown by Figure 157 on page 284. 

*2. Proof of Bolzano’s Theorem 

A rigorous proof of this theorem will be given. (Like Gauss and other great 
mathematicians, one may accept and use the fact without proof.) Our objective 
is to reduce the theorem to fundamental properties of the real number system, 
in particular to the Dedekind-Cantor postulate concerning nested intervals 



PROOF OF BOLZANO’S THEOREM 


313 


(p. 68). To this end we consider the interval I, a < x < b, in which the func¬ 
tion f(x) is defined, and bisect it by marking the mid-point, Xi =■ ^ jf 



this mid-point we find that f(xi) =* 0, then there remains nothing further to prove. 
If, however, f{xi) 0, then f{xi) must be either greater than or less than zero. 
In either case one of the halves of I will again have the property that the sign of 
f(x) is different at its two extremes. Let us call this interval Ii . We continue 
the process by bisecting h ; then either/(x) = 0 at the midpoint of h , or we can 
choose an interval h , half of Ii , with the property that the sign of f(x) is different 
at its two extremes. Repeating this procedure, either we shall find after a finite 
number of bisections a point for which/(x) = 0, or we shall obtain a sequence of 
nested intervals /i, /a, /a, • • • . In the latter case, the Dedekind-Cantor postu¬ 
late assures the existence of a point a in / common to all these intervals. We 
assert that f(a) ** 0, so that a is the point whose existence proves the theorem. 

So far the assumption of continuity has not been used. It now serves to clinch 
the argument by a bit of indirect reasoning. We shall prove that /(a) =■ 0 by 
assuming the contrary and deducing a contradiction. Suppose that f(a) ^ 0, 
e.g. that /(a) *» 2€ > 0. Since/(x) is continuous, we can find a (perhaps very 
small) interval J of length 25 with a as midpoint, such that the value of /(x) 
everywhere in J differs from /(a) by less than «. Hence, since /(a) » 2^, we can 
be sure that /(x) > e everywhere in so that/(x) > 0 in /. But the interval J 
is fixed, and if n is sufficiently large the little interval In must necessarily fall 
within J, since the sequence In shrinks to zero. This yields the contradiction; 
for it follows from the way /„ was chosen that the function/(x) has opposite signs 
at the two endpoints of every /« , so that /(x) must have negative values some¬ 
where in J, Thus the absurdity of /(a) > 0 and (in the same way) of /(a) < 0 
proves that /(a) » 0. 

3. Weierstrass’ Theorem on Extreme Values 

Another important and intuitively plausible fact about continuous 
functions was formulated by Karl Weierstrass (1815-1897), who, per- 



314 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


(VII 


haps more than anyone else, was responsible for the modem trend 
towards rigor in mathematical analysis. This theorem states: If a funo- 
turn f(x) ta continuous in an interval I, a< x < b, including the end¬ 
points a and b of the interval, then there must exist at least one point 
in I where f(x) attains its largest value M, and another point where f(x) 
attains its least value m. Intuitively speaking, this means that the 
graph of the continuous function u = f(x) must have at least one highest 
and one lowest point. 

It is important to observe that the statement need not be true if the 
function fix) fails to be continuous at the endpoints of J. For example, 

the function f(x) = - has no largest value in the interval 0 < x < 1, 

X 

although /(x) is continuous throughout the interior of this interval. 
Nor need a discontinuous function assume a greatest or a least value 
even if it is bounded. For example, consider the very discontinuous 
function /(x) defined by setting 

/(x) = X for irrational x, 

/(x) = J for rational x, 

in the interval 0 < x < 1. This function always takes on values 
between 0 and 1, in fact values as near to 1 and 0 as we may wish, if x 
is chosen as an irrational number suflSciently near to 0 or 1. But /(x) 
can never be equal to 0 or 1, since for rational x we have /(x) = i, 
and for irrational x we have /(x) = x. Hence 0 and 1 are never 
attained. 

* Weierstrass’ theorem can be proved in much the same way as Bolzano’s 
theorem. We divide I into two closed half-intervals 7' and I" and fix our atten¬ 
tion on I' as the interval in which the greatest value of f{x) must be sought, 
unless there is a point a in I" such that f(a) exceeds all the values of f(x) in 7 '; in 
the latter case we select 7". The interval so selected we call 7,. Now we proceed 
with 7i in the same say as we did with 7, obtaining an interval It , and so on. This 
process will define a sequence Ii,It, ••• , In, ••• of nested intervals all contain¬ 
ing a point s. We shall prove that the value /(z) — JIf is the largest attained by 
/(*) in 7, i.e. that there cannot be a point s in 7 for which /(«) > M. Suppose there 
were a point s with /(s) » M -|- 2<, where < is a (perhaps very small) positive 
number. Around z as center we can, because of the continuity of f(x), mark off 
a small interval K, leaving s outside, and such that in K the values of f(x) differ 
from/(z) — M by less than «, so that we certainly have f(x) < M -H «in JC. But 
for sufficiently large n the interval 7. lies inside K, and 7» was so defined that no 
value of /(x) for x outside 7. can exceed all the values of /(x) for x in 7n . Since 
s is outside In and /(s) > M + t, while in K, and hence in 7„, we have 
f(x) < Af -I- «, we have arrived at a contradiction. 



WEIERSTRASS* THEOREM ON EXTREME VALUES 


315 


The existence of a least value m may be proved in the same way, or it follows 
directly from what has already been proved, since the least value of /(x) is the 
greatest value of g{x) — —/(a?). 

Weierstrass' theorem can be proved in a similar way for continuous functions 
of two or more variables x, y, • • • . Instead of an interval with its endpoints we 
have to consider a closed domain, e.g. a rectangle in the x, y-plane which includes 
its boundary. 

Exercise: Where, in the proofs of Bolzano’s and Weierstrass’ theorems, did 
we use the fact that /(x) was assumed to be defined and continuous in the whole 
closed interval a ^ x < b and not merely in the interval a<x<6ora<x<6? 

The proofs of Bolzano’s and Weierstrass’ theorems have a decidedly 
non-constructive character. They do not provide a method for actually 
finding the location of a zero or of the greatest or smallest value of a 
function with a prescribed degree of precision in a finite number of steps. 
Only the mere existence, or rather the absurdity of the non-existence, 
of the desired values is proved. This is another important instance 
where the **intuitionists” (see p. 86) have raised objections; some have 
even insisted that such theorems be eliminated from mathematics. The 
student of mathematics should take this no more seriously than did 
most of the critics. 


*4. A Theorem on Sequences. Compact Sets 

Let Xi, X 2 , X 3 , • • • be any infinite sequence of numbers, distinct or 
not, all contained in the closed interval /, a < x < &. The sequence 
may or may not tend to a limit. But in any case, it is always possible 
to extract from such a sequence, by omitting certain of its terms, an infinite 
subsequence, yi, y 2 , yi, • • •, which tends to some limit y contained in the 
interval I. 

To prove this theorem we divide the interval I into two closed sub¬ 
intervals r and by marking the midpoint - of I : 


T/ ^ ^ ck b 

V: a <x < 

//'; ^ "t.j <X <b. 

2 

In at least one of these, which we may call h , there must lie infinitely 
many terms Xn of the original sequence. Choose any one of these terms, 
say Xn,, and call it yi . Now proceed in the same way with the inter¬ 
val h . Since there are infinitely many terms Xn in Ji, there must be 
infinitely many terms in at least one of the halves of Ii , which we may 
^all 7i. Hence we can certainly find a term Xn in I 2 for which n > ni. 



816 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


IVII 


Choose some one of these, and call it y% • Proceeding in this way, we 
can find a sequence /i, / 2 , /s, • • • of nested intervals and a subsequence 
yiiVtiVii • • • of the original sequence, such that y^ lies in In for every n. 
This sequence of intervals closes down on a point y of /, and it is clear 
that the sequence yi, yt^ ys, • • • has the limit a, as was to be proved. 

* These considerations are capable of the type of generalization that is typical 
of modern mathematics. Let us consider a variable X ranging over a general set 
S in which some notion of ''distance" is defined. S may be a set of points in the 
plane or in space. But this is not necessary; for example, S might be the set of 
all triangles in the plane. If X and Y are two triangles, with vertices A, B, C 
and A', B', C' respectively, then we can define the "distance" between the two 
triangles as the number 

d(X, Y) - AA' + BB' + CC', 

where AA*, etc. denotes the ordinary distance between the points A and A\ 
Whenever there exists such a notion of "distance" in a set S we may define the 
concept of a sequence of elements Xt, Xt, Xt, ••• tending to a limit element 
X of B. By this we mean that d(Xt Xn) 0 as n -♦ «>. We shall now say that 
the set S ts compact if from any sequence Xi, X*, X| , • • • of elements of S we 
can always extract a subsequence which tends to some limit element X of S. We 
have shown in the preceding paragraph that a closed interval a ^ x bis compact 
in this sense. Hence the concept of a compact set may be regarded as a generaliza¬ 
tion of a closed interval of the number axis. Note that the number axis as a whole is 
not compact, since the sequence of integers 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, • • • neither tends to a limit 
nor contains any subsequence that does. Nor is an open interval such as 
0 < X < 1, not including its endpoints, compact, since the sequence J, J, 
I, • • • or any subsequence of it tends to the limit 0, which is not a point of 
the open interval. In the same way it may be shown that the region of the plane 
consisting of the points interior to a square or rectangle is not compact, but be¬ 
comes compact if the boundary points are added. Furthermore, the set of all 
triangles whose vertices lie within or on the circumference of a given circle is 
compact. 

We may also extend the notion of continuity to the case where the variable 
X ranges over any set S in which the notion of limit is defined. The function 
u =■ F{X)f where w is a real number, is said to be continuous at the element X if, 
for any sequence of elements Xi,Xi,Xi, ••• which tends to X as limit, the cor¬ 
responding sequence of numbers F(Xi), F(X|), • • • tends to the limit F(X), (An 
equivalent (c, 5)-definition could also be given.) It is quite easy to show that 
Weierstrass’ theorem also holds in the general case of a continuous function 
defined over the elements of any compact set: 

// u *■ F(X) is any continuous function defined on a compact set S, then there 
always exists an element of S for which F(X) attains its largest value, and also 
one for which it attains its smallest value. 

The proof is simple once one has grasped the general concepts involved, but 
we shall not go further into this subject. It will appear in Chapter VII that 
the general theorem of Weierstrass is of great importance in the theory of maxima 
and minima. 



GEOMETRICAL APPLICATIONS 


317 


§6. SOME APPLICATIONS OF BOLZANO’S THEOREM 
L Geometrical Applications 

Bolzano’s simple yet general theorem may be used to prove many 
facts which are not at all obvious at first sight. We begin by proving: 
If A and B are any two areas in the plane, then there exists a straight line 
in the plane which bisects A and B simultaneously. By an ‘‘area” we 
mean any portion of the plane included within a simple closed curve. 

Let us begin by choosing some fixed point P in the plane, and drawing 
from P a directed ray PR from which to measure angles. If we take 
any ray PS which makes an angle x with PR, there will exist a directed 
straight line in the plane bisecting the area A, and with the same direction 
as the ray PS. For if we take a directed line k with the direction of PS 
and lying wholly on one side of A and move this line parallel to itself 
until it is in position k (see Fig. 173), wholly on the other side of A, 
then the function whose value is defined to be the area of A to the right 
of the line (the east direction if the arrow on the line points north) 
minus the area of A to the left of the line will be positive for position Zi 
and negative for position k . Since this function is continuous, by 
Bolzano’s theorem it must be zero for some intermediate position Z,, 
which therefore bisects A. For each value of x from a: — 0® to a: = 360®, 
the line U which bisects A is uniquely defined. 





Fig. 173. Simultaneous bisection of two areas. 

Now let the function y = f{x) be defined as the area of B to the right 
of lx minus the area of B to the left of Z, . Suppose that the line Zo 
which bisects A and has the direction of PR has more of B to the right 
than to the left; then for x = 0®, y is positive. Let x increase to 180®, 
then the line Ziso with direction RP which bisects A is the same as Zo 
but oppositely directed, with right and left interchanged; hence the 
value of y tor x = 180® is the same numerically as for x = 0®, but with 



318 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VI 


opposite sign, and therefore negative. Since y is a continuous function 
of X as f c turns around, there exists some value a of a: between 0 ® and 
180® for which y is zero. It follows that the line la bisects A and B 
simultaneously. This completes the proof. 

Note that although we have proved the existence of a line with the 
desired property, we have given no definite procedure for constructing 
it; this exhibits again the distinguishing feature of mathematical exist¬ 
ence proofs as compared with constructions. 

A similar problem is the following: Given a single area in the plane, 
it is desired to cut it into four equal pieces by two perpendicular lines. 
In order to prove that this is always possible, we return to our previous 
problem at the stage where we had defined h for any angle x, but we 
forget about the area B. Instead, we take the line f,+ 9 o which is per¬ 
pendicular to Iz and which also bisects A. If we number the four pieces 
of A as shown in Figure T74, then we have 

Ai + Aj = A3 -|- A4 
and 

Aj + As = Ai + A4, 





from which it follows, on subtracting the second equation from the first, 
that 


i.e. 


Ai — A| = Ai — Ai, 


Ai ■» As, 



GEOMETRICAL APPLICATIONS 


319 


and hence 

Ai = At. 

Thus if we can show the existence of an angle a such that for h 

Ai(a) = 4s(a), 

then our theorem will be proved, since for such an angle all four areas 
will be equal. To do this, we define a function y = f(x) by drawing Z, 
and setting 

f(x) = Ai{x) - Ai{x). 

For X = 0®, /(O) = i4.i(0) — j 1*(0) may be positive. In that case, for 
a: = 90®, 4i(90) - .4a(90) = ^,(0) - 4,(0) = 4,(0) - 4,(0) will be 
negative. Therefore, since f{x) varies continuously as x increases from 
0 ® to 90®, there will be some value a between 0® and 90® for which 
/(«) = 4i(a) — 4s(a) = 0. The lines Z„ and la+w then divide the area 
into four equal pieces. 

It is interesting to observe that these problems may be generalized 
to three and higher dimensions. In three dimensions the first problem 
becomes; Given three volumes in space, to find a plane which bisects 
all three simultaneously. The proof that this is always possible again 
depends on Bolzano’s theorem. In more than three dimensions the 
theorem is still true but the proof requires more advanced methods. 

*2. Application to a Problem of Mechanics 

We shall conclude this section by discussing an apparently difficult 
problem in mechanics that is easily answered by an argument based on 
continuity concepts. (This problem was suggested by H. Whitney.) 

Suppose a train travels from station 4 to station B along a straight 
section of track. The journey need not be of uniform speed or accelera¬ 
tion. The train may act in any manner, speeding up, slowing down, 
coming to a halt, or even backing up for a while, before reaching B. 
But the exact motion of the train is supposed to be known in advance; 
that is, the function a = /(<) is given, where a is the distance of the train 
from station 4, and t is the time, measured from the instant of departure. 
On the floor of one of the cars a rod is pivoted so that it may move with¬ 
out friction either forward or backward until it touches the floor. If it 
does touch the floor, we assume that it remains on the floor henceforth; 
this will be the case if the rod does not bounce. Is it possible to place 
the rod in such a position that, if it is released at the instant when the 
train starts and allowed to move solely under the influence of gravity 



320 


FUNCTIONS AND LIMITS 


[VI] 


and the motion of the train, it will not fall to the floor during the entire 
journey from A to B? 



A B 

Fis 176. 


It might seem quite unlikely that for any given schedule of motion 
the interplay of gravity and reaction forces will always permit such 
a maintenance of balance under the single condition that the initial posi¬ 
tion of the rod is suitably chosen. Yet we state that such a position 
always exists. 

Paradoxical as this assertion might seem at first sight, it can be proved 
easily once one concentrates on its essentially topological character. 
No detailed knowledge of the laws of dynamics is needed; only the 
following simple assumption of a physical nature need be granted: The 
motion of the rod depends continimtsly on its initial position. Let us 
characterize the initial position of the rod by the initial angle x which it 
makes with the floor, and by y the angle which the rod makes with the 
floor at the end of the journey, when the train reaches the point B, If 
the rod has fallen to the floor we have either y = 0 or y = tt. For a 
given initial position x the end position y is, according to our assump¬ 
tion, uniquely determined as a function y = g{x) which is continuous 
and has the values y = 0 for x = 0 and y = ir for x = tt (the latter 
assertion simply expressing that the rod will remain flat on the floor if 
it starts in this position). Now we recall that g{x)^ as a continuous 
function in the interval 0 < x < ir, assumes all the values between ^(0) = 
0 and giy) = tt; consequently, for any such values e.g. for the value 

y = there exists a specific value of x such that g{x) = y; in particular, 

there exists an initial position for which the end position of the rod at 
B is perpendicular to the floor. (Note: In this argument it should not 
be forgotten that the motion of the train is fixed once for all.) 

Of course, the reasoning is entirely theoretical. If the journey is of 
long duration or if the train schedule, expressed by s = /(O, is very 
erratiq, then the range of initial positions x for which the end position 



APPLICATION TO PROBLEM OF MECHANICS 


321 


g{x) differs from 0 or ir will be exceedingly small, as is known to anyone 
who has tried to balance a needle upright on a plate for an appreciable 
time. Still, our reasoning should be of value even to a practical mind 
inasmuch as it shows how qualitative results in dynamics may be ob¬ 
tained by simple arguments without technical manipulation. 

Exercises: 1. Using the theorem of page 315, show that the reasoning above 
may be generalized to the case where the journey is of infinite duration. 

2. Generalize to the case where the motion of the train is along any curve in 
the plane and the rod may fall in any direction. (Hint: It is not possible to map 
a circular disk continuously onto its circumference alone by a mapping which 
eaves every point of the circumference fixed (see p. 265)). 

3. Show that the time required for the rod to fall to the floor, if the car is 
stationary and the rod is released at an angle c from the vertical position, tends 
to infinity as c tends to zero. 



SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER VI 

MORE EXAMPLES ON LIMITS AND CONTINUITY 


§ 1 . EXAMPLES OF LIMITS 

1. General Remarks 

In many cases the convergence of a sequence an can be proved 
by an argument of the following sort. We find two other sequences, K 
and c», whose terms have a simpler structure than those of the original 
sequence, and such that 

(1) ^ Un ^ Cn 

for every n. Then if we can show that the sequences bn and Cn hoth covr 
verge to the same limit a, it follows that an also converges to the limit a. 
We shall leave the formal proof of the statement to the reader. 

It is clear that applications of this procedure will involve the use of 
inequalities. It is therefore appropriate to recall a few elementary rules 
which govern arithmetical operations with inequalities. 

1 . If a > 6 , then a + c > 6 + c (any number may be added to both 
sides of an inequality). 

2 . If a > 6 and the number c is positive^ then ac > be (an inequality 
may be multiplied by any positive number). 

3 . If a < 6 , then — 6 < — a (the sense of an inequality is reversed if 
both sides are multiplied by — 1 ). Thus 2 < 3 but —3 < — 2 . 

4. If a and b have the same sign, and if a < 6 , then 1/a > 1 / 6 . 

5. |a + 5|<|al + |6|. 

2. The limit of q" 

If g is a number greater than 1 , the sequence will increase beyond 
any bound, as does the sequence 2 , 2 ^, 2 ®, • • • for g = 2 . The sequence 
^'tends to infinity^' (see p. 294). The proof in the general case is based 
on the important inequality (proved on p. 15) 

(2) (1 + hy >l + nh> nh, 

where h is any positive number. We set g = 1 + A, where A > 0 ; then 

g’* = (1 + A)" > nA. 

322 



THE LIMIT OF 323 

If k is any positive number, no matter how large, then for all n > k/h 
it follows that 

q"" > nh > k; 

hence . 

If q = 1, then the members of the sequence g" are all equal to 1, and 1 
is therefore the limit of the sequence. If q is negative, then g’* will 
alternate between positive and negative values, and will have no limit 
if g < —1. 

Exercise: Give a rigorous proof of the last statement. 

On page 64 we showed that if — 1 < g < 1, then g" 0. We may 
give another and very simple proof of this fact. First we consider the 
case where 0 < g < 1. Then the numbers g, g^, q • • • form a mono¬ 
tone decreasing sequence bounded below by 0. Hence, according to 
page 295, the sequence must approach a limit: g** —^ a. Multiplying 
both sides of this relation by g we obtain g”^^ —> og. 

Now must have the same limit as g’', since the name, n orn + 1, 
of the increasing exponent, does not matter. Hence og = a, or 
o(g — 1) = 0. Since 1 — g 5 *^ 0, this implies that a = 0. 

If g = 0, the statement g** 0 is trivial. If —1 < g < 0, then 
0 < I g 1 < 1; hence | g’* | = 1 g T 0 by the preceding argument 
From this it follows that always g"* —> 0 for | g | < 1. This complete 
the proof. 

Exercises; Prove that for »»—♦«: 

1) (xVl + x‘)- - 0; 

2) (x/1 + **)» -♦ 0; 

3) (a:*/4 + *’)“ tends to infinity for * > 2, to 0 for | x 1 <2. 

3. The Limit of 

The sequence an = ->/p, i.e. the sequence p, y/ p, • • • > 

the limit 1 for any fixed positive number p: 

(3) -x/p-^lasn—>00. 

(By the symbol S/p we mean, as always, the positive nth root. For 
negative numbers p there are no real nth roots when n is even.) 

To prove the relation (3), we first suppose that p > 1; then will 
also be greater than 1. Thus we may set 

\/p = 1 + An , 

where K is a positive quantity depending on n. The inequality (2) 
then shows that 


p = (1 + An)" > wAn. 



324 


EXAMPLES ON LIMITS AND CONTINUITY 


I VII 


On dividing by n we see that 

0 < A* < p/n. 


Since the sequences 6, = 0 and Cn = p/n both have the limit 0, it 
follows by the argument of Article 1 that An also has the limit 0 as n 
increases, and our assertion is proved for p > 1. Here we have a 
typical instance where a limiting relation, in this case An 0, is recog¬ 
nized by enclosing An between two bounds whose limits are more easily 
obtained. 

Incidentally, we have derived an estimate for the difference An between 
't/p and 1; this difference must always be less than p/n. 

If 0 < p < 1, then -C/p < 1, and we may set 


v/p = 


1 

1 + An’ 


where A, is again a positive number depending on n. It follows that 


M that 


P 


1 

(1 + A,)- 



0 < A, < 


np’ 


From this we conclude that h„ tends to 0 as n increases. Hence, since 
S/p = 1/(1 + An), it follows that S/p !• 

The equalizing effect of nth root extraction, which tends to push 
every positive number towards 1 as n increases, is even strong enough 
to do this in some cases if the radicand does not remain constant. We 
shall prove that the sequence 1, ^/2, ■'/Z, ■'^5, • • • tends to 1, 

i.e. that 

•y/n —* 1 


as n increases. By a little device this can again be shown to follow from 
the in^uality (2). Instead of the nth root of n, we take the nth root 
of Vn. If we set y/y/n = 1 -1- An, where An is a positive number 
depending on n, then the inequality yields \/n = (1 -4- An)" > nAn, 
BO that 


Hence 



1 

aA' 


1 < = (1 + KY = 1 + 2K + kl < 1 + -^ + ~. 

Vn « 



THE LIMIT OF 325 

The right side of this inequality tends to 1 as n increases, so that -v/n 
must also tend to 1 . 


4. Discontinuous Functions as Limits of Continuous Functions 


We may consider limits of sequences an when an is not a fixed number 
but depends on a variable x: an = fn(x). If this sequence converges 
as w 00 , then the limit is again a function of x, 

fix) = lim fn{x). 


Such representations of functions f(x) as limits of others are often 
useful in reducing “higher’’ functions /(x) to elementary functions /n(x). 

This is true in particular of the representation of discontinuous func¬ 
tions by explicit formulas. For example, let us consider the sequence 

fnix) = —. For I X 1 = 1 we have x^'* = 1 and hence /n(x) = 1/2 

1 -T X'^ 

for every n, so that/n(x) —> 1/2. For | x | < 1 we have x^" —>0, and hence 
fnix) — ^ 1, while for I X I > 1 we have x^” —► oo, and hence fnix) 0. 
Summarizing: 


fix) = lim 


1 

1 + X2»» 


1 for I X I < 1, 
< 1/2 for I X I = 1 , 
0 for 1 X 1 > 1. 


Here the discontinuous function fix) is represented as the limit of a 
sequence of continuous rational functions. 

Another interesting example of a similar character is given by the 
sequence 


fnix) = x^ + 


+ 


l + x^ ' (1+xO 


+ ••• + 


(1 + xr 


For X = 0 all the values/n(x) are zero, and therefore/(O) = lim/n(0) = 0. 
For x 9 ^ 0 the expression 1/(1 + x*) = 5 is positive and less than 1 ; 
our results on geometrical series guarantee the convergence of fnix) 
forn 00 . The limit, i.e. the sum of the infinite geometrical series, is 
x^ x^ 

- - s -, which is equal to 1 + x^ Thus we see that 


fnix) tends to the function fix) = 1 + x* for x 5 ^ 0 , and to fix) = 0 
ff^r r 0. This function has a removable discontinuity at x = 0. 



326 


EXAMPLES ON LIMITS AND CONTINUITY 


[VII 


*5. limits by Iteration 

Often the terms of a sequence are such that Un+i is obtained from On 
by the same procedure as On from On-i ; the same process, indefinitely 
repeated, produces the whole sequence from a given initial term. In 
such cases we speak of a process of 'iteration.’’ 

For example, the sequence 

1, vTTl, Vi + V2, Vr+VTTvS. ••• 

has such a law of formation; each term after the first is formed by taking 
the square root of 1 plus its predecessor. Thus the formula 

ai = 1 , Un+l = '\/l + On 

defines the whole sequence. Let us find its limit. Obviously an is 
greater than 1 for n > 1. Furthermore an is a monotone increasing 
sequence, for 

ai+l - ai = (1 + an) - (1 + Un-l) = Un - Un-l . 


Hence whenever Un > Un-i it will follow that Un+i > On . But we know 
that aj — ai = \/2 ~ 1 > 0, from which we conclude by mathematical 
induction that Un+i > an for all n, i.e. that the sequence is monotone 
increasing. Moreover it is bounded; for by the previous results we 
have 

= 1 + -1_ < 2. 

Un+1 Un-H ttn+l 


By the principle of monotone sequences we conclude that for n <x> 
an —> a, where a is some number between 1 and 2. We easily see that a 
is the positive root of the quadratic equation x* = 1 + x. For as n —► «> 
the equation an+i = 1 + Un becomes = 1 + a. Solving this equation. 


we find that the positive root is a = 


1 + \/5 


Thus we may solve this 


quadratic equation by an iteration process which gives the value of the 
root with any degree of approximation if we continue long enough. 

We can solve many other algebraic equations by iteration in a similar 
way. For example, we may write the cubic equation x* — 3x + 1 == 0 
in the form 


X 


1 

3-x2* 


We now choose any value for ai, say oi = 0, and define 

1 



LIMITS BY ITERATION 


327 


obtaining the sequence (h — 1/3 == .3333 • • • , as = 9/26 = .3461* • • , 
ai = 676/1947 = .3472 • •. , etc. It may be shown that the sequence 
On obtained in this way converges to a limit a = .3473 • • • which is a 
solution of the given cubic equation. Iteration processes such as thir 
are highly important both in pure mathematics, where they yield **ex¬ 
istence proofs” and in applied mathematics, where they provide ap¬ 
proximation methods for the solution of many types of problems. 

Exercises on limit s. Fo r n —► « : 

1) Prove 4- 1 “ 0- 

(Hint: write the difference in the form 


\/ n 4“ 1 — \/h 
y/n 4“ 1 4" \/w 


(\/n 4-14- 


2) Find the limit of \/ n^ 4 - a — \/ n* 4- b. 

3) Find the limit of \/n* 4 - an 4 - 6 — n. 

4) Find the limit of — ,-- - 7 :^. 

Vn 4- 1 4- Vn 

6 ) Prove that the limit of y^n + 1 is 1. 

6 ) What is the limit of + t** if a > 6 > 0? 

7) What is the limit of -f 4 - c" if a > 6 > c > 0 ? 

8 ) What is the limit of-^a" 6 ’* 4 - 4 - if a > 6 > c > 0 ? 

9) We shall see later (p, 449) that e =* lim (1 4- l/n)**. What then is 
lim (1 4 - l/n*)"? 


§2. EXAMPLE ON CONTINUITY 


To give a precise proof of the continuity of a function requires the 
explicit verification of the definition of page 310. Sometimes this is a 
lengthy procedure, and therefore it is fortunate that, as we shall see in 
Chapter VIII, continuity is a consequence of differentiability. Since 
the latter will be established systematically for all elementary functions, 
we may follow the usual course of omitting tedious individual proofs of 
continuity. But as a further illustration of the general definition we 


shall analyze one further example, the function f{x) = -—^—-. We 

1 4 “ 2 :-^ 

may restrict x to a fixed interval | x | < M, where M is an arbitrarily 
selected number. Writing 


f(xi) - fix) = 


1 

1 + xl 


1 

1 + a:* 


X* — x* 

(1 + x*)(l + xj) 


(x - Xi) 


jx + Xi) 

(i + x’)(i + x;)’ 



328 


EXAMPLES ON LIMITS AND CONTINUITY 


[VII 


we find for IX I < Af and | xi | ^ Af 

l/(*i) - /(») I < I * - II» + *11 < I * - *1 |•2A^. 

Hence it ia clear that the difference on the left side will be smaller than any 

positive number e if only | Ux — x | < d — ~ . 

It should be noted that we are being quite generous in our appraisals. 
For large values of x and Xi the reader will easily see that a much larger 
6 would suffice. 



CHAPTER VII 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 

INTRODUCTION 

A straight segment is the shortest connection between its endpoints. 
An arc of a great circle is the shortest curve joining two points on a 
sphere. Among all closed plane curves of the same length the circle 
encloses the largest area, and among all closed surfaces of the same 
area the sphere encloses the largest volume. 

Maximum and minimum properties of this type were known to the 
Greeks, even though the results were often stated without a real at¬ 
tempt at a proof. One of the most significant Greek discoveries is 
ascribed to Heron, the Alexandrian scientist of the first century A.D. 
It had long been known that a light ray from a point P meeting a plane 
mirror L in a point R is reflected in the direction of a point Q such that 
PR and QR form equal angles with the mirror. Heron found that if R' 
is any other point on the mirror, then the total distance PR' + R'Q 
is larger than the distance PR + RQ, This theorem, which we shall 
prove presently, characterizes the actual path of light PRQ between P 
and Q as the shortest possible path from P to Q by way of the mirror— 
a discovery that can be considered the germ of the theory of geometrical 
optics. 

It is only natural that mathematicians should be interested in ques¬ 
tions of this sort. In daily life problems of maxima and minima, of the 
“best” and the “worst,” arise constantly. Many problems of practical 
importance present themselves in this form. For example, how should 
a boat be shaped so as to have the least possible resistance in water? 
What cylindrical container made from a given amount of material has 
a maximum volume? 

Starting in the seventeenth century, the general theory of extreme 
values—maxima and minima—^has become one of the systematic inte¬ 
grating principles of science. Fermat^s first steps in his differential 
calculus were prompted by the desire to study questions of maxima and 
minima by general methods. In the century that followed, the scope 

329 



330 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


of these methods was greatly widened by the invention of the “calculus 
of variations/’ It became increasingly apparent that the physical laws 
of nature are most adequately expressed in terms of a minimum principle 
that provides a natural access to a more or less complete solution of 
particular problems. One of the most remarkable achievements of 
contemporary mathematics is the theory of stationary values—an 
extension of the notion of extreme values which combines analysis and 
topology. Our approach to the whole subject will be quite elementary. 

§1. PROBLEMS IN ELEMENTARY GEOMETRY 

1. Maximum Area of a Triangle with Two Sides Given 

Given two segments a and b; required to find the triangle of maximum 
area having a and b as sides. The solution is simply the right triangle 
whose two legs are a and 6. For consider any triangle with a and b as 

sides, as in Figure 176. If h is the altitude 
on the base o, then the area of the triangle is 
A = ^ah. Now ^ah is clearly a maximum 
when h is largest, and this occurs when h 
coincides with 6; that is, for a right triangle. 
Hence the maximum area is ^ab, 

2. Heron’s Theorem. Extremum Property of Light Rays 

Given a line L and two points P and Q on the same side of L. For 
what point f? on L is PR + RQ the shortest path from P to L to Q? 
This is Heron’s problem of the light ray. (If L were the bank of a 
stream, and someone had to go from P to Q as fast as possible, fetching 
a pail of water from L on the way, then he would have to solve just this 
problem.) To find the solution, we reflect P in L as in a mirror, ob¬ 
taining the point P' such that L is the perpendicular bisector of PP'. 
The line P'Q intersects L in the required point P. It is simple to prove 
that PR + RQ is smaller than PP' + P'Q for any other point P' on L. 
For PP = P'P and PP' == P'P'; hence, PP + PQ = P'P + PQ = P'Q 
and PP' + P'Q = P'P' + P'Q. But P'P' + P'Q is greater than P'Q 
(since the sum of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the third 
side), hence PP' + P'Q is greater than PP + PQ, which was to 
be proved. In what follows we assume that neither P nor Q lies on L. 

From Figure 177 we see that ^.3 = ^2, and 2^2 = 4 I, so that 
2^1 = 2IJ.3. In other words, R is the point such that PR and QR make 
equal angles with L. From this it follows that a light ray reflected in 



Fig. 17«. 



HERON^S THEOREM 


331 


L (which is known from experiment to make equal angles of incidence 
and reflection) actually takes the shortest path from P to L to Q, as 
stated above in the introduction. 



Fig. 177. Heron's theorem. 

The problem can be generalized to include several lines L, M, • • • . 
For example, consider the case where we have two lines L, M and two 
points P, Q situated as in Figure 178, with the problem of finding the 
path of minimum length from P to L, then to M, then to Q. Let Q' 
be the reflection of Q in ikf and Q" the reflection of Q' in L. Draw 



PQ" intersecting L in P and RQ' intersecting M in S; then R and S 
are the required points such that PR + RS + SQ is the path of minimum 
length from P to L to to Q, The proof of this fact is very similar 
to that of the previous problem, and is left as an exercise for the reader. 
If L and M were mirrors, a light ray from P, reflected from L to M, 
and there reflected to Q, would meet L at P and ilf at S; hence the 
light ray would again take the path of shortest length. 

One might ask for the shortest path first from P to Af, then to L, 




332 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


IVIII 


and from there to Q. This would give a path PRSQ (see Fig, 179) 
determined in a manner similar to the previous path PRSQ, The length 
of the first path may be greater than, equal to, or less than that of the 
second. 



* Exercise: Show that the first path is smaller than the second if 0 and R lie 
on the same side of the line PQ. When will the two paths be of equal length? 

3. Applications to Problems on Triangles 

With the help of Heron’s theorem solutions to the following two 
problems are easily obtained. 

a) Given the area A and one side c = PQ of a triangle; among all 
such triangles to determine the one for which the sum of the other sides 
a and b is smallest. Prescribing the side c and the area A of a triangle 
is equivalent to prescribing the side c and the altitude h on c, since 
A = ihc. Referring to Figure 180, the problem is therefore to find a 





Fig. 180. Triangle of minimum perimeter with given base and area. 

point R such that the distance from R to the line PQ is equal to the 
given hf and such that the sum a + 5 is a minimum. From the first 
condition it follows that R must lie on the line parallel to PQ at a dis¬ 
tance h. The answer is given by Heron’s theorem for the special case 





APPLICATIONS TO PROBLEMS ON TRIANGLES 


333 


where P and Q are equally distant from L: the required triangle PRQ 
is isosceles. 

b) In a triangle let one side c and the sum a + b of the two other 
sides be given; to find among all such triangles the one with the largest 
area. This is just the converse of problem a). The solution is again 
the isosceles triangle for which a = 6. As we have just shown, this 
triangle has the minimum value of a + 6 for its area; that is, any 
other triangle with the base c and the same area has a greater value 
of a + fe. Moreover, it is clear from a) that any triangle with base c 
and an area greater than that of the isosceles triangle also has a greater 
value of a + 6. Hence any other triangle with the same values of a + 6 
and of c must have a smaller area, so that the isosceles triangle provides 
the maximum area for given c and a + b. 

4. Tangent Properties of Ellipse and Hyperbola. Corresponding 
Extremum Properties 

The problem of Heron is connected with some important geometrical 
theorems. We have proved that if R is the point on L such that 
PR + RQ is a minimum, then PR and RQ make equal angles with L. 
This minimum total distance we shall call 2a. Let p and q denote the 
distances from any point in the plane to P and Q respectively, and con¬ 
sider the locus of all points in the plane for which p + g = 2a. This 
locus is an ellipse, with P and Q as foci, that passes through the point 
R on the line L. Moreover, L must be tangent to the ellipse at R. If 
L intersected the ellipse at a point other than 72, there would be a 



Fig. 181. Tangent property of ellipse. 


segment of L lying inside the ellipse; for each point of this segment 
V + q would be less than 2a, since it is easily seen that p + ^ is less 
than 2a inside the ellipse and greater than 2a outside. Since we know 
that p + g > 2a on L, this is impossible. Hence L must be tangent 
to the ellipse at R, But we know that PR and RQ make equal angles 
with L; hence we have incidentally proved the important theorem: A 



334 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


IVII) 


tangent to an ellipse makes equal angles with the lines joining the foci 
to the point of tangency. 

Closely related to the foregoing discussion is the following problem: 
Given a straight line L and two points P and Q on opposite sides of L 
(see Fig. 182), to find a point 22 on L sucn that the quantity | p — g I, 
that is, the absolute value of the difference of the distances from P and 
Q to 22, is a maximum, (We shall assume that L is not the perpendicular 
bisector of PQ; for then p — q would be zero for every point R on L 
and the problem would be meaningless.) To solve this problem, we 
first reflect P in L, obtaining the point P' on the same side of L as Q. 
For any point 22' on L, we have p = R'P = 22'P', q = R'Q. Since 22', 
Q, and P' can be regarded as the vertices of a triangle, the quantity 
I p — g I = 122'P' — R'Q I is never greater than P'Q, for the difference 



Fig. 182. I PR — QR | maximum. 

between two sides of a triangle is never greater than the third side. If 
P', and Q all lie on a straight line, \ p — q \ will be equal to P'Q, 
as is seen from the figure. Therefore the desired point R is the inter¬ 
section of L with the line through P' and Q. As in the previous case, 
it is easily seen that the angles which RP and RQ make with L are 
equal, since the triangles PPP' and PP'P' are congruent. 

This problem is connected with a tangent property of the hyperbola, 
just as the preceding one was connected with the ellipse. If the maxi¬ 
mum difference | PR — QR | has the value 2a, we can consider the locus 
of all points in the plane for which p — q has the absolute value 2a. 
This is a hyperbola with P and Q as its foci and passing through the 
point R. As is easily shown, the absolute value of p — g is less than 
2a in the region between two branches of the hyperbola, and greater 
than 2a on that side of each branch where the corresponding focus lies. 
It follows, by essentially the same argument as for the ellipse, that L 
must be tangent to the hyperbola at R. Which of the two branches is 




TANGENT PROPERTIES OF ELLIPSE 


335 


touched by L depends on whether P or Q is nearer to L; if P is nearer, 
the branch surrounding P will touch L, and likewise for Q (see Fig. 183) 


i 


Fig. 183. Tangent property of hyperbola. 

If P and Q are equidistant from L, then L will touch neither branch of 
the hyperbola, but will, instead, be one of the curvets asymptotes. 
This result becomes plausible when one observes that for this case the 
preceding construction will yield no -(finite) point P, since the line 
P'Q will be parallel to L. 

In the same way as before this argument proves the well known 
theorem: A tangent to a hyperbola at any point bisects the angle sub¬ 
tended at that point by the foci of the hyperbola. 

It may seem strange that if P and Q are on the same side of L we 
have a minimum problem to solve, while if they are on opposite sides of 
L we considered a maximum problem. That this is natural can be seen 
at once. In the first problem, each of the distances p, g, and therefore 
their sum, becomes larger without bound as we proceed along L in¬ 
definitely in either direction. Hence it would be impossible to find a 
maximum value for p + and a minimum problem is the only possi¬ 
bility. It is quite different in the second case, where P and Q lie on dif¬ 
ferent sides of L. Here, to avoid confusion, we have to distinguish 
between the difference p — q, its negative q — p, and the absolute value 
Ip — g I; it is the latter which was made a maximum. The situation 
is best understood if we let the point R move along the line L through 
different positions, Pi, P*, Ps, • • • . There is one point for which 
the difference p — g is zero: the intersection of the perpendicular 
bisector of PQ with L. This point therefore gives a minimum for the 
absolute value 1 p — g 1 - But on one side of this point p is greater than 
g, and on the other, less; hence the quantity p — g is positive on one 
side of the point and negative on the other. Consequently p — g 
itself is neither a maximum nor a minimum at the point for which 




336 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


I p — g I = 0 . However, the point making | p — 3 | a maximum is 
actually an extremum of p — 3 . If p > 3 , we have a maximum for 
p — 3 ;if 3 >p, a maximum for 3 — p and hence a minimum for p — 3 . 
Whether a maximum or a minimum for p — 3 is obtainable is deter¬ 
mined by the position of the two given points P, Q relative to the 
line L, 

We have seen that no solution of the maximum problem exists if P 
and Q are equidistant from L, since then the line P'Q in Figure 182 
is parallel to L. This corresponds to the fact that the quantity | p — 3 | 
tends to a limit as R tends to infinity along L in either direction. This 
limiting value is equal to the length of the perpendicular projection 5 
of PQ on L (the reader may prove this as an exercise). If P and Q 
have the same distance from L, then | p — 3 | will always be less than 
this limit and no maximum exists, since to each point R we can find 
another farther out for which | p — 3 | is larger, but still not quite equal 
to 5 . 


*5. Extreme Distances to a Given Curve 

First we shall determine the shortest and the longest distance from a 
point P to a given curve C. For simplicity we shall suppose that C is a 
simple closed curve with a tangent everywhere, as in Figure 184. (The 
concept of tangent to a curve is here accepted on an intuitive basis 
that will be analyzed in the next chapter.) The answer is very simple: 



Fig. 184. Extreme distancee to a curve. 


A point R on C for which the distance PR has its smallest or its largest 
value must be such that the line PR is perpendicular to the tangent to 
C at i?; in other words, PR "13 perpendicular to C. The proof is as 
follows: the circle with center at P and passing through R must be 



EXTREME DISTANCES TO CURVE 


337 


tangent to the curve. For if jR is the point of minimum distance, C 
must lie entirely outside the circle, and therefore cannot cross it at R, 
while if R is the point of maximum distance, C must lie entirely inside 
the circle, and again cannot cross it at R. (This follows from the obvious 
fact that the distance from any point to P is less than RP if the point 
lies inside the circle, and greater than RP if the point lies outside the 
circle.) Hence the circle and the curve C will touch and have a common 
tangent at R. Now the line PR, being a radius of the circle, is per¬ 
pendicular to the tangent to the circle at R, and therefore perpendicular 
to C at R. 

Incidentally, the diameter of such a closed curve C, that is, its longest 
chord, must be perpendicular to C at both endpoints. The proof is 
left as an exercise for the reader. A similar statement should be 
formulated and proved in three dimensions. 

Exercise: Prove that the shortest and longest segments connecting two non¬ 
intersecting closed curves are perpendicular to the curves at their endpoints. 

The problems in Article 4 concerning the sum or difference of dis¬ 
tances can now be generalized. Consider, instead of a straight line L, 
a simple closed curve C with a tangent at every point, and two points, 
P and Qf not on C. We wish to characterize the points on C for which 
the sum, p + q, and the difference, p — q, take on their extreme values, 
where p and q denote the distances from any point on C to P and Q 
respectively. No use can be made of the simple construction of reflec¬ 
tion with which we solved the problems for the case where C is a straight 
line. But we may use the properties of the ellipse and hyperbola to 
solve the present problems. Since C is a closed curve and no longer a 
line extending to infinity, both the minimum and maximum problems 
make sense here, for it may be taken as granted that the quantities 
p q and p — g have greatest and least values on any finite segment of a 
curve, in particular on a closed curve (see §7). 

For the case of the sum, p + g, suppose R is the point on C for which 
p + g is a maximum, and let 2 a denote the value of p + g at R. Con¬ 
sider the ellipse with foci at P and Q that is the locus of all points for 
which p + g = 2a. This ellipse must be tangent to C at R (the proof 
is left as an exercise for the reader). But we have seen that the lines 
PR and QR make equal angles with the ellipse at R; since the ellipse is 
tangent to C at R, the lines PR and QR must also make equal angles 
with C at R. If p + g is a minimum for R, we see in the same way that 



338 MAXIMA AND MINIMA IVII’ 

PR and QR make equal angles with C at R. Thus we have the theorem: 
Given a closed curve C and two points P and Q on the same side of C; 
then at a point P of C where the sum p + 9 takes on its greatest or 
least value on C, the lines PR and QR make equal angles with the curve 
C (i.e. with its tangent) at R. 

If P is inside C and Q outside, this theorem also holds for the greatest 
value ofp + q, but fails for the least value, since the ellipse degenerates 
into a straight line. 



Fig. 185. Greatest and least values of Fig. 180. Least value of PR — QR. 

PR d- QR. 


By an entirely analogous procedure, making use of properties of the 
hyperbola instead of the ellipse, the reader may prove the following 
theorem: Given a closed curve C and two points P and Q, on different 
sides of C; then at a point R of C where p — g takes on its greatest or 
least value on C, the lines PR and QR make equal angles with C. Again 
we emphasize that the problem for a closed curve C differs from that 
for an infinite line inasmuch as in the latter problem the maximum of 
the absolute value | p — g | was sought while now a maximum (as well 
as a minimum) of p — g exits. 

♦§2. A GENERAL PRINCIPLE UNDERLYING EXTREME 
VALUE PROBLEMS 

1. The Principle 

The preceding problems are examples of a general question which is 
best formulated in analytic language. If, in the problem of finding the 
extreme values of p + g, we denote by x, y the coordinates of the point 


THE PRINCIPLE 


339 


R, by Xi, yi the coordinates of the fixed point P, and by x *, yt those of Q, 
then 

P = V(x-xi)" + (y - 3 = V(x - x,)' + (y - yt)\ 

and the problem is to find the extreme values of the function 

/(x, 2/) = p + g. 

This function is continuous everywhere in the plane, but the point with 
the coordinates x, y is restricted to the given curve C. This curve will 
be defined by an equation g(x, y) = 0; e.g. x* + — 1 = 0 if it is 

the unit circle. Our problem then is to find the extreme values of 
/(x, y) when x and y are restricted by the condition that g{x, y) = 0, 
and we shall consider this general type of problem. 

To characterize the solutions, we consider the family of curves with 
the equations/(x, p) = c; that is, the curves given by equations of this 
form, where the constant c may have any value, the same for all points 
of any one curve of the family. Let us assume that one and only one 
curve of the family /(x, y) — c passes through each point of the plane, 
at least if we restrict ourselves to the vicinity of the curve C. Then as 
c changes, the curve/(x, y) = c will sweep out a part of the plane, and 
no point in this part will be touched twice in the sweeping process. 
(The curves x^ — = c, x + = c, and x = c are such families.) In 

particular, one curve of the family will pass through the point Ri , where 



/(x, y) takes on its greatest value on C, and another one through the 
point R 2 where/(x, y) takes on its least value. Let us call the greatest 
value a and the least value b. On one side of the curve/(x, y) = a the 
value of /(x, y) will be less than a. and on the other side greater than a. 



340 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


Since Six, y) < a on C, C must lie entirely on one side of the curve 
f(^x, y) = a; hence it must be tangent to that curve at Ri . Similarly, 
C must be tangent to the curve/(a:, y) = 6 at 722. We thus have the 
general theorem: If at a point R on a curve C a function f(x, y) has an 
extreme value a, the curve f (x, y) = a is tangent to C at R. 

2. Examples 

The results of the preceding section are easily seen to be special cases 
of this general theorem. If p + ^ is to have an extreme value, the 
function fix, 2/) is p + and the curves fix, y) = c are the confocal 
ellipses with foci P and Q. As predicted by the general theorem, the 
ellipses passing through the points on C where fix, y) takes on its ex¬ 
treme values were seen to be tangent to C at these points. In the case 
where the extrema ol p — q are sought, the function fix, ?/) is p — q, 
the curves/(x, y) — c are the confocal hyperbolas with P and Q as their 
foci, and the hyperbolas passing through the points of extreme value 
of fix, y) were seen to be tangent to C. 



Fig. 188. Confocal ellipses. 



Fig. 189. Confocal hyperbolas. 


Another example is the following: Given a line segment PQ and a 
straight line L not intersecting the line segment. At what point of L 
will PQ subtend the greatest angle? 

The function to be maximized here is the angle 6 subtended by PQ 
from points on L. The angle subtended by PQ from any point R in 
the plane is a function 6 = f(x, y) of the coordinates of R. From 
elementary geometry we know that the family of curves d = f(z, y) = c 
is the family of circles through P and Q, since a chord of a circle sub- 



EXAMPLES 


341 


tends the s&nie Angle at all points of the circumference on the same side 
of the chord. As is seen from Figure 190, two of these circles will, in gen- 



Fig. 190. Point on L from which segment PQ appears largest. 


eral, be tangent to L, with centers on opposite sides of PQ, One of the 
points of tangency gives the absolute maximum for while the other 
point yields a ^^relative” maximum (that is, the value of 0 will be less 
in a certain neighborhood of this point than at the point itself. The 
greater of the two maxima, the absolute maximum, is given by that 
point of tangency which lies in the acute angle formed by the extension 
of PQ and U, and the smaller one by the point which lies in the obtuse 
angle formed by these two lines. (Thej point where the extension of the 
segment PQ intersects L gives the minimum value of 6 , zero.) 

As a generalization of this problem we may replace L by a curve C, 
and seek the point /? on C at which a given line segment PQ (not inter¬ 
secting C) subtends the greatest or least angle. Here again, the circle 
through P, Q, and R must be tangent 'to C at R. 

§3. STATIONARY POINTS AND THE DIFFERENTIAL 

CALCULUS 

1. Extrema and Stattonary Points 

In the preceding arguments the technique of the differential calculus 
was not used. As a matter of fact, our elementary methods are far 
more simple and direct than those of the calculus. As a rule in scientific 



342 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


thinking it is better to consider the individual features of a problem 
rather than to rely exclusively on general methods, although individual 
efforts should always be guided by a principle that clarifies the meaning 
of the special procedures used. This is indeed the r61e of the differential 
calculus in extremum problems. The modem search for generality 
represents only one side of the case, for the vitality of mathematics 
depends most decidedly on the individual color of problems and methods. 

In its historic development, the differential calculus was strongly in¬ 
fluenced by individual maximum and minimum problems. The con¬ 
nection between extrema and the differential calculus arises as follows. 
In Chapter VIII we shall make a detailed study of the derivative f{x) 
of a function f{x) and of its geometrical meaning. In brief, the deriva¬ 
tive f'(x) is the slope of the tangent to the curve y = f(x) at the point 
(x, y). It is geometrically evident that at a maximum or minimum of 
a smooth curve y = /(x) the tangent to the curve must be horizontal, 
that is, its slope must be equal to zero. Thus we have the condition 
f(x) = 0 for the extreme values of f(x). 

To see what the vanishing of f(x) means, let us examine the curve 
of Figure 191. There are five points. A, 8,0, D, E, at which the tangent 



to this curve is horizontal; let the values of f(x) at these points be a, b, 
c, d, e respectively. The maximum of /(x) in the interval pictured is at 



EXTREMA AND STATIONARY POINTS 


343 


Z>, the minimum at A, The point B also represents a maximum, in 
the sense that for all other points in the immediate neighborhood of S, 
f{x) is less than 6, although /(x) is greater than h for points close to D. 
For this reason we call B a relative maximum of /(x), while D is the 
absolute maximum. Similarly, C represents a relative minimum and A 
the absolute minimum. Finally, at J5, /(x) has neither a maximum nor 
a minimum, even though f\x) = 0. From this it follows that the 
vanishing of /'(x) is a necessary^ but not a sufficient condition for the 
occurrence of an extremum of a smooth function /(x); in other words, 
at any extremum, relative or absolute, /'(x) = 0, but not every point 
at which/'(x) = 0 need be an extremum. A point where the derivative 
vanishes, whether it is an extremum or not, is called a stationary point. 
By a more refined analysis, it is possible to arrive at more or less com¬ 
plicated conditions on the higher derivatives of /(x) which completely 
characterize the maxima, minima, and other stationary points. 

2. Maxima and Minima of Functions of Several Variables. Saddle 

Points 

There are problems of maxima and minima that cannot be ex¬ 
pressed in terms of a function /(x) of one variable. The simplest such 
case is that of finding the extreme values of a function z = /(x, y) of 
two variables. 

We can represent /(x, y) by the height z of a surface above the x, y- 
plane, which we may interpret, say, as a mountain landscape. A 
maximum of /(x, y) corresponds to a mountain top; a minimum, to the 
bottom of a depression or of a lake. In both cases, if the surface is 
smooth the tangent plane to the surface will be horizontal. But there 
are other points besides summits and the bottoms of valleys for which 
the tangent plane is horizontal; these are the points given by mountain 
passes. Let us examine these points in more detail. Consider as in 




Fig. 102. A mountain paM. Fig. 108 The corresponding contour map. 

Figure 192 two mountains A and B on a range 'and two points C and Z> 
on different sides of the mountain range, and suppose that we wish to 



344 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VII] 


go from C to D. Let us first consider only the paths leading from C to D 
obtained by cutting the surface with some plane through C and D. 
Each such path will have a highest point. By changing the position of 
the plane, we change the path, and there will be one path CD for which 
the altitude of that highest point is least. The point E of maximum 
altitude on this path is a mountain pass, called in mathematical 
language a saddle point. It is clear that E is neither a maximum nor a 
minimum, since we can find points as near E as we please which are 
higher and lower than E. Instead of confining ourselves to .paths that 
lie in a plane, we might just as well consider paths without this restric¬ 
tion. The characterization of the saddle point E remains the same. 

Similarly, if we want to proceed from the peak A to the peak B, any 
particular path will have a lowest point; if again we consider only plane 
sections, there will be one path AB for which this lowest point is highest, 
and the minimum for this path is again at the point E found above. 
This saddle point E thus has the property of being a highest minimum 
or a lowest maximum; that is, a maxi-minimum or a mini-maximum. 
The tangent plane at E is horizontal; for, since E is the minimum point 
of AB, the tangent line to A5 at E must be horizontal, and similarly, 
since E is the maximum point of CD, the tangent line to CD at E must 
be horizontal. The tangent plane, which is the plane determined by 
these lines, is therefore also horizontal. Thus we find three different 
types of points with horizontal tangent planes: maxima, minima, and 
saddle points; corresponding to these we have different types of station¬ 
ary values of /(x, y). 

Another way of representing a function f(x, y) is by drawing contour 
lines, such as those used in maps for representing altitudes (see p. 286). 
A contour line is a curve in the x, y-plane along which the function 
f{x, y) has a constant value; thus the contour lines are identical with the 
curves of the family /(x, y) = c. Through an ordinary point of the 
plane there passes exactly one contour line; a maximum or minimum 
is surrounded by closed contour lines; while at a saddle point several 
contour lines cross. In Figure 193 contour lines are drawn for the 
landscape of Figure 192, and the maximum-minimum property of E is 
evident: Any path connecting A and B and not going through E has 
to go through a region where /(x, y) < f{E), while the path AEB of 
Figure 192 has a minimum at E. In the same way we see that the value 
y) at E is the smallest maximum for paths connecting C and D. 



MINIMAX POINTS AND TOPOLOGY 


345 


3. Minimax Points and Topology 

There is an intimate connection between the general theory of sta¬ 
tionary points and the concepts of topology. Here we can give only a 
brief indication of these ideas in connection with a simple example. 

Let us consider the mountain landscape on a ring-shaped island B 
with the two boundaries C and C'. If again we represent the altitude 
above sea-level hy u = /(x, y), with /(x, y) = 0 on C and C' and 
/(x, 2 /) > 0 in the interior of B, then there must exist at least one moun¬ 
tain pass on the island, shown in Figure 194 by the point where the 
contour lines cross. Intuitively, this can be seen if one tries to go from 



C to C' in such a way that one^s path does not rise higher than necessary. 
Each path from C to C' must possess a highest point, and if we select 
that path whose highest point is as low as possible, then the highest 
point of this path is a saddle point of w = /(x, y). (There is a trivial 
exception when a horizontal plane is tangent to the mountain crest all 
around the ring.) For a domain bounded by p curves there must exist, 
in general, at least p — 1 stationary points of minimax type. Similar 
relations have been discovered by Marston Morse to hold in higher 
dimensions, where there is a greater variety of topological possibilities 
and of types of stationary points. These relations form the basis of the 
modern theory of stationary points. 

4, The Distance from a Point to a Surface 

For the distance between a point P and a closed curve there are (at 
least) two stationary values, a minimum and a maximum. Nothing 
new occurs if we try to extend this result to three dimensions, so long 
as we consider a surface C topologically equivalent to a sphere, e.g. an 
ellipsoid. But new phenomena appear if the surface is of higher genus, 



346 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


e.g. a torus. There is still a shortest and a longest distance from P to 
a torus C, both segments being perpendicular to C. In addition we 
find extrema of different types representing maxima of minima or minima 
of maxima. To find them, we draw on the torus a closed “meridian” 
circle L, as in Figure 195, and we seek on L the point Q nearest to P. 
Then we try to move L so that the distance PQ becomes: a) a minimum. 
This Q is simply the point on C nearest to P. b) a maximum. This 
yields another stationary point. We could just as well seek on L the 
point farthest from P, and then find L such that this maximum distance 
is: c) a maximum, which will be attained at the point on C farthest 
from P. d) a mi n imu m. Thus we obtain four different stationary 
values of the distance. 



Fig. m Fig. m 


* Exercise: Repeat the reasoning with the other type L' of closed curve on C 
that cannot be contracted to a point, as in Figure 196. 

§4. SCHWARZ’S TRIANGLE PROBLEM 

1. Schwarz’s Proof 

Hermann Amandus Schwarz (1843-1921) was a distinguished mathe¬ 
matician of the University of Berlin and one of the great contributors 
to modem function theory and analysis. He did not disdain to write 
on elementary subjects, and one of his papers treats the following 
problem: Given an acute-angled triangle, to inscribe in it another 
triangle with the least possible perimeter. (By an inscribed triangle 
we mean one with a vertex on each side of the original triangle.) We 
^hall see that there is hxacUy one such triangle, and that its vertices 
are the foot-points of the altitudes of the given triangle. We shall call 
this triangle the aUitttde triangle. 



SCHWARZ’S PROOF 


347 


Schwarz proved the minimum property of the altitude triangle by 
the method of reflection, with the help of the following theorem of 
elementary geometry (see Fig. 197): At each vertex, P, Q, R, the two 
sides of the altitude triangle make equal angles with the side of the orig¬ 
inal triangle; this angle is equal to the angle at the opposite vertex of 
the original triangle. For example, the angles ARQ and BRP are both 
equal to angle C, etc. 

To prove this preliminary theorem, we note that OPBR is a quad¬ 
rilateral that can be inscribed in a circle, since ^OPB and ^ORB are 
right angles. Consequently, ^PBO = iS^PRO, since they subtend the 
same arc PO in the circumscribed circle. Now ^PBO is complementary 
to ^C, since CBQ is a right triangle, and )i^PRO is complementary to 
^PRB. Therefore the latter is equal to In the same way, using 

the quadrilateral QORA, we see that iS^QRA = 2^C, etc. 


c 



Fig. 197. Altitude triangle of ABC, showing equal angles. 

This result enables us to state the following reflection property of 
the altitude triangle: Since, for example 2S^AQR = T^CQP^ the reflec¬ 
tion of RQ in the side AC is the continuation of PQ, and vice versa; 
similarly for the other sides. 

We shall now prove the minimum property of the altitude tri¬ 
angle. In the triangle ABC consider, together with the altitude triangle, 
any other inscribed triangle, UVW. Reflect the whole figure first in the 
side AC of ABCj then reflect the resulting triangle in its side AB then 
in BC then again in AC, and finally in AB, In this way we obtain 
altogether six congruent triangles, each with the altitude triangle and 
the other one inscribed. The side BC of the last triangle is parallel to 
the original side BC. For in the first reflection, BC is rotated clockwise 
through an angle 2C, then through 2 B clockwise; in the third reflection 
it is not affected, in the fourth it rotates through 2C counterclockwise. 


348 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


tVII] 


B 



C 

Fig. 198. Schwarz’s proof that altitude triangle has least periraetor. 


and in the fifth through 2 B counterclockwise. Thus the total angle 
through which it has turned is zero. 

Due to the reflection property of the altitude triangle, the straight 
line segment PP' is equal to twice the perimeter of the altitude triangle; 
for PP' is composed of six pieces that are, in turn, equal to the first, 
second, and third side of the triangle, each side occurring twice. Simi¬ 
larly, the broken line from U to U' is twice the perimeter of the other 
inscribed triangle. This line is not shorter than the straight line seg¬ 
ment UU\ Since UU^ is parallel to PP', the broken line from U to [/' 
is not shorter than PP', and therefore the perimeter qf the altitude 


SCHWARZ^S PROOF 


349 


triangle is the shortest possible for any inscribed triangle, as was to be 
proved. Thus we have at the same time shown that there is a minimum 
and that it is given by the altitude triangle. That there is no other 
triangle with perimeter equal to that of the altitude triangle will be 
seen presently. 


2. Another Proof 

Perhaps the simplest solution of Schwarz^s problem is the following, 
based on the theorem proved earlier in this chapter that the sum of 
the distances from two points P and Q to a line L is least at that point 
R ol L where PR and QR make the same angle with L, provided that 
P and Q lie on the same side of L and neither lies on L. Assume that 
the triangle PQR inscribed in the triangle ABC solves the minimum 
problem. Then R must be the point on the side AB where p + 5 is a 
minimum, and therefore the angles ARQ and BRP must be equal; 
similarly, T^AQR = T^CQP^ 2^J5P/J = ^CPQ. Thus the minimum 
triangle, if it exists, must have the equal-angle property used in 
Schwarz^s proof. It remains to be shown that the only triangle with 
this property is the altitude triangle. Moreover, since in the theorem 
on which this proof is based it is assumed that P and Q do not lie on AB, 
the proof does not hold in case one of the points P, Q, R is a vertex of 
the original triangle (in which case the minimum triangle would de¬ 
generate into twice the corresponding altitude); in order to complete the 
proof we must show that the perimeter of the altitude triangle is shorter 
than twice any altitude. 




To dispose of the first point, we observe that if an inscribed triangle 
has the equal-angle property mentioned above, the angles at P, Q, and 
R must be equal to 2 }.A, 4 .B, and 2^C respectively. For assume, say, 
that 4 ARQ = 2^ C + 6. Then, since the sum of the angles of a tri- 


350 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


tVIIl 


angle is 180®, the angle at Q must be 5 — 5, and at P, — 5, in Order 
that the triangles ARQ and BRP may have the sum of their angles 
equal to 180®. But then the sum of the angles of the triangle CPQ is 
A — S + B — S + C = 180® — 25; on the other hand, this sum must be 
180®. Therefore 5 is equal to zero. We have already seen that the 
altitude triangle has this equal-angle property. Any other triangle 
with this property would have its sides parallel to the corresponding 
sides of the altitude triangle; in other words, it would have to be similar 
to it and oriented in the same way. The reader may show that no other 
such triangle can be inscribed in the given triangle (see Fig. 200). 

Finally, we shall show that the perimeter of the altitude triangle 
is less than twice any altitude, provided the angles of the original 
triangle are all acute. We produce the sides QP and QR and draw the 


C 



Fi(. 201. 

perpendiculars from B to QP, QR, and PR, thus obtaining the points 
L, M, and N. Then QL and QM are the projections of the altitude QB 
on the lines QP and QR respectively. Consequently, QL + QM < 2QB. 
Now QL -f- QM equals p, the perimeter of the altitude triangle. For 
triangles MRB and NRB are congruent, since angles MRB and NRB 
are equal, and the angles at M and N are right angles. Hence 
RM >= RN ; therefore QM — QR -|- RN. In the same way, we see that 
PN = PL, so that QL = QP -4- PN. We therefore have QL -|- QM = 
QP + QR + PN + NR = QP + QR + PR = p. But we have 
^own that 2QB > QL + QM. Therefore p is less than twice the 
altitude QB; by exactly the same argument, p is less than twice any 



ANOTHER PROOF 


351 


altitude, as was to be proved. The minimum property of the altitude 
triangle is thus completely proved. 

Incidentally, the preceding construction permits the direct calculation of p. 
We know that the angles PQC and RQA are equal to B, and therefore PQB =» 
RQB « 90® — Bf so that cos (PQB) = sin B. Therefore, by elementary trigo¬ 
nometry, QM =* QL =* QB sin J5, and p =» 2QB sin B. In the same way, it can be 
shown that p ** 2PA sin A » 2RC sin C. From trigonometry, we know that 
BC =* o sin B = 6 sin A, etc., which gives p =* 2a sin B sin C = 26 sin C sin A - 2c 
sin A sin B. Finally, since a = 2r sin A, 6 =» 2r sin B, c * 2r sin C, where r is the 
radius of the circumscribed circle, we obtain the symmetrical expression, p « 
4r sin A sin B sin C. 


3. Obtuse Triangles 

In both of the foregoing proofs it has been assumed that the angles 
A, B, and C are all acute. If, say, C is obtuse, as in Figure 202, the 



Fig. 202. Altitude triangle for obtuse triangle. 

points P and Q will lie outside the triangle. Therefore the altitude 
triangle can no longer, strictly speaking, be said to be mscribed in the 
triangle, unless by an inscribed triangle we merely mean one whose 
vertices are on the sides or on the extensions of the sides of the original 
triangle. At any rate, the altitude triangle does not now give the 
minimum perimeter, for PR > CR and QR > CR; hence p = PR + 
QR + PQ > 2CR. Since the reasoning in the first part of the last 
proof showed that the minimum perimeter, if not given by the altitude 
triangle, must be twice an altitude, we conclude that for obtuse triangles 
the ^^inscribed triangle^' of smallest perimeter is the shortest altitude 
counted twice, although this is not properly a triangle. Still, one can 
find a proper triangle whose perimeter differs from twice the altitude by 
as little as we please. For the boundary case, the right triangle, the 
two solutions—twice the shortest altitude, and the altitude triangle 
coincide. 

The interesting question whether the altitude triangle has an}' sort 



352 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIIJ 


of extremum property for obtuse triangles cannot be discussed here. 
Only this much may be stated: the altitude triangle gives, not a mini¬ 
mum for the sum of the sides, p + g + r, but a stationary value of 
noinimax type for the expression p + q — r, where r denotes the side 
of the inscribed triangle opposite the obtuse angle. 

4. Triangles Formed by light Rays 

If the triangle ABC represents a chamber with reflecting walls, then 
the altitude triangle is the only triangular light path possible in the 
chamber. Other closed light paths in form of polygons are not excluded, 
as Figure 203 shows, but the altitude triangle is the only such polygon 
with three sides. 



Fig. 203. Cloeed light path in a triangular mirror. 

We may generalize this problem by asking for the possible “light 
triangles” in an arbitrary domain bounded by one or even several 
smooth curves; i.e. we ask for triangles with their vertices somewhere 
on the boundary curves and such that each two adjacent edges form 
the same angle with the curve. As we have seen in §1, the equality of 
angles is a condition for maximum as well as minimum total length of 
the t\vo edges, so that we may, according to circumstances, find different 
types of light triangles. For example, if we consider the interior of a 
single smooth curve C, then the inscribed triangle of maximum length 
must be a light triangle. Or we may consider (as suggested to the 
authors by Marston Morse) the exterior of three smooth closed curves. 
A light triangle ABC may be characterized by the fact that its length 
has a stationary value; this value may be a minimum with respect to all 
three points A, B, C, it may be a minimum with respect to any of the 
combinations such as A and B and a maximum with respect to the third 


TRIANGLES FORMED BY LIGHT RAYS 


353 


point C, it may be a minimum with respect to one point and a maximum 
with respect to the two others, or finally it may be a maximum with 
respect to all three points. Altogether the existence of at least 2^ = 8 
light triangles is assured, since for each of the three points independently 
either a maximum or a minimum is possible. 





Figs. 204-7. The four types of light triangles between three circles. 

*5. Remarks Concerning Problems of Reflection and Ergodic Motion 

It is a problem of major interest in dynamics and optics to describe 
the path or ‘^trajectory^^ of a particle in space or of a light ray for an 
unlimited length of time. If by some physical device the particle or 
ray is restricted to a bounded portion of space, it is of particular interest 
to know whether the trajectory will, in the limit, fill the space every¬ 
where with an approximately equal distribution. Such a trajectory is 
called ergodic. The assumption of its existence is basic for statistical 
methods in modern dynamics and atomic theory. But very few relevant 
instances are known where a rigorous mathematical proof of the ^^ergodic 
hypothesis^^ can be given. 

The simplest examples refer to the case of motion within a plane 



354 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


I VIII 


curve C, where the wall C is supposed to act as a perfect mirror, reflecting 
the otherwise free particle at the same angle at which it hits the bound¬ 
ary. For example, a rectangular box (an idealized billiard table with 
perfect reflection and a mass point as billiard ball) leads in general to 
an ergodic path; the ideal billiard ball going on for ever will reach the 
vicinity of every point, except for certain singular initial positions and 
directions. We omit the proof, although it is not diflScult in principle. 

Of particular interest is the case of an elliptical table with the foci 
Fi and . Since the tangent to an ellipse makes equal angles with 
the lines joining the point of tangency to the two foci, every trajectory 
through a focus will be reflected through the other focus, and so on. 
It is not hard to see that, irrespective of the initial direction, the trajec¬ 
tory after n reflections tends with increasing n to the major axis FiF ^. 
If the initial ray does not go through a focus, then there are two possi¬ 
bilities. If it passes between the foci, then all the reflected rays will 
pass between the foci, and all will be tangent to a certain hyperbola 
having Fi and Fj as foci. If the initial ray does not separate Fi and F ^, 
tlien none of the reflected rays will, and they will all be tangent to an 
ellipse having Fi and F 2 as foci. Thus in no case will the motion be 
ergodic for the ellipse as a whole. 

*Exercise8: 1) Prove that if the initial ray passes through a focus of the ellipse, 
the nth reflection of the initial ray will tend to the major axis as n increases. 

2) Prove that if the initial ray passes between the two foci, all the reflected 
rays will do so, and all will be tangent to some hyperbola having Fi and F% as 
foci; similarly, if the initial ray does not pass between the foci, none of the re¬ 
flected rays will, and all will be tangent to some ellipse with Fi and Fj as foci. 
(Hint: Show that the ray before and after reflection at R makes equal angles with 
the lines RFi and RFt respectively, and then prove that tangents to confocal 
conics can be characterized in this way.) 

§5. STEINER^S PROBLEM 

1. Problem and Solution 

A very simple but instinctive problem was treated by Jacob Steiner, 
the famous representative of geometry at the University of Berlin in the 
early nineteenth century. Three villages A, B, C are to be joined by a 
system of roads of minimum total length. Mathematically, three 
points A, 5, C are given in a plane, and a fourth point P in the plane is 
sought so that the sum a + b + c shall be a minimum, where a, h, c 
denote the three distances from P to Ay C respectively. The answer 
to the problem is: If in the triangle ABC all angles are less than 120®, 
then P is the point from which each of the three sides, AB, BC, CA, 



PROBLEM AND SOLUTION 


365 



subtends an angle of 120°. If, however, an angle of ABC^ e.g. the angle 
at C, is equal to or larger than 120°, then the point P coincides with the 
vertex C. 

It is an easy matter to obtain this solution if we use our previous 
results concerning extrema. Suppose P is the required minimum point. 
There are these alternatives: either P coincides with one of the vertices 
AjByCjOrP differs from these vertices. In the first case it is clear that 
P must be the vertex of the largest angle C of ABC, because the sum 
CA + CB is less than any other sum of two sides of the triangle ABC. 
Thus, to complete the proof of our statement, we must analyze the 
second case. Let K be the circle with radius c around C. Then P 
must be the point on K such that PA + PB is a minimum. If A and B 



are outside of Ky as in Figure 209, then, according to the result in §1, 
PA and PB must form equal angles with the circle K and hence with 
the radius PC, which is perpendicular to K. Since the same reasoning 
applies also to the position of P and the circle with the radius o around Ay 
it follows that all three angles formed by PA, PP, PC are equal, and 



356 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VII] 


consequently equal to 120°, as stated. This reasoning was based on 
the assumption that A and B are both outside of K, which remains to 
be proved. Now, if at least one of the points A and B, say Ay were 
on or inside Ky then, since P, as assumed, is not identical with A or J5, 
we should have a + h > AB, But AC < c, since A is not outside K. 
Hence 

a 4" 6 “f- c > AB -f* AC, 

which means that we should obtain the shortest sum of distances if P 
coincided with A, contrary to our assumption. This proves that A 
and B are both outside the circle K. The corresponding fact is simi¬ 
larly proved for the other combinations: B, C with respect to a circle 
of radius o about A, and A, C with respect to a circle of radius h about B. 

2. Analysis of the Alternatives 

To test which of the two alternatives for the point P actually occurs 
we must examine the construction of P. To find P, we merely draw 
the circles Ki , on which two of the sides, say AC and BC, subtend 
arcs of 120°. Then AC will subtend 120° from any point on the shorter 
arc into which AC divides Ki , but will subtend 60° from any point on 
the longer arc. The intersection of the two shorter arcs, provided such 
an intersection exists, gives the required point P, for not only will 
AC and BC subtend 120° at P, but AB will also, the sum of the three 
angles being 360°. 

It is clear from Figure 210 that if no angle of triangle ABC is greater 
than 120°, then the two shorter arcs intersect inside the triangle. On 



the other hand, if one angle, C, of triangle ABC is greater than 120°, 
then the two shorter arcs of Ki and fail to intersect, as is shown in 


ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES 


357 



Figure 211. In this case there is no point P from which all three sides 
subtend 120®. However, Ki and Ki determine at their intersection a 
point P' from which AC and BC subtend angles of 60® each, while the 
side AB opposite the obtuse angle subtends 120®. 

For a triangle ABC having an angle greater than 120® there is, then, 
no point at which each side subtends 120®. Hence the minimum point P 
must coincide with a vertex, since that was shown to be the only other 
alternative, and this must be the vertex at the obtuse angle. If, on the 
other hand, all the angles of a triangle are less than 120®, we have seen 
that a point P can be constructed from which each side subtends 120®. 
But to complete the proof of our theorem we have yet to show that 
a + 6 + c will actually be less here than if P coincided with any vertex, 
for we have only shown that P gives a minimum if the smallest total 


A 



Fig. 212 




358 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


length is not attained at one of the vertices. Accordingly, we must 
show that a + b + c 18 smaller than the sum of any two sides, say 
AB + AC, To do this, extend BP and project A on this line, obtaining 
a point D (Fig. 212). Since ^APD = 60®, the length of the projection 
PD is Ja. Now BD is the projection of AB on the line through B and 
P, and consequently BD < AB, But BD = 6 + Ja, therefore 
b + ia < AB, In exactly the same way, by projecting A on the ex¬ 
tension of PC, we see that c + < AC, Adding, we obtain the 

inequality a + b + c < AB + AC, Since we already know that if 
the minimum point is not one of the vertices it must be P, it follows 
finally that P is actually the point at which a + 6 + c is a minimum. 

3. A Complementary Problem^ 

The formjd methods of mathematics sometimes reach out beyond 
one^s original intention. For example, if the angle at C is greater than 
120® the procedure of geometrical construction produces, instead of the 
solution P (which in this case is the point C itself) another point P', 
from which the larger side AB of the triangle ABC appears under an 


P' 



Fig. 213. a + ^ minimum. 

angle of 120®, and the two smaller sides under the angle of 60®. Cer¬ 
tainly P' does not solve our minimum problem, but we may suspect 
that it has some relation to it. The answer is that P' solves the fol¬ 
lowing problem: to minimize the expression a + b — c. The proof is 
entirely analogous to that given above for o + 5 + c, based on the 
results of §1, Article 5, and is left as an exercise for the reader. Com¬ 
bined with the preceding result, we have the theorem: 

If the angles of a triangle ABC are all less than 120®, then the sum 
of the distances a, 6, c from any point to A, 5, C, respectively, is least 
at that point where each side of the triangle subtends an angle of 
120®, and a + 5 — c is least at vertex C; if one angle, say C, is greater 
than 120®, then a -f 6 + c is least at C, and a 4- 5 — c is least at that 
point where the two shorter sides of the triangle subtend angles of 60® 
and the longest side subtends an angle of 120®. 



A COMPLEMENTARY PROBLEM 


359 


Thus, of the two minimum problems, one is always solved by the 
circle construction and the other by a vertex. For — 120® the two 
solutions of each problem, and indeed the solutions of the two problems, 
coincide, since the point obtained by the construction is then precisely 
the vertex C. 


4. Remarks and Exercises 

If from a point P inside an equilateral triangle UVW we drop three 
perpendicular lines PA, PB, PC as shown in Figure 214, then A, B, C, 
and P form the figure studied above. This remark can serve in solving 
Steiner’s problem by starting with the points A, B, C and then finding 
U, V, W. 


W 



Fig. 214. Another proof of Steiner's solution. 


Exercises: 1) Carry out this scheme, using the fact that from any point in 
an equilateral triangle the sum of the three perpendicular segments is constant 
and equal to the altitude. 

2) Using the corresponding fact when P is outside UVWj discuss the comple¬ 
mentary problem. 

In three dimensions one might study a similar problem: Given four points 
A, B, C, D; to find a fifth point P such that a-|-6-fc4-disa minimum. 

* Exercise: Investigate this problem and its complementary problem by the 
methods of §1, or by using a regular tetrahedron. 

5. Generalization to the Street Network Problem 

In Steiner’s problem three fixed points A, B, C are given. It is 
natural to generalize this problem to the case of n given points, 
A,, As, .. • , i4„ ; we ask for the point P in the plane for which the 


360 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VII ] 


sum of the distances ai + os + • • • + o„ is a minimum, where is the 
distance PAi. (For four points, arranged as in Fig. 215, the point P 



Fig. 216. Least sum of distances to four points. 

is the point of intersection of the diagonals of the quadrilateral 
A\AiAiAi ; the reader may prove this as an exercise.) This prob¬ 
lem, which was also treated by Steiner, does not lead to interesting 
results. It is one of the superficial generalizations not infrequently 
found in mathematical literature. To find the really significant exten¬ 
sion of Steiner's problem we must abandon the search for a s ngle 
point P. Instead, we look for the ^'street network" of shortest total 
length. Mathematically expressed: Given n points^ Ai, . •. , An to 
find a connected system of straight line segments of shortest total length 
such that any two of the given points can be joined by a polygon consisting 
of segments of the system. 

The appearance of the solution will, of course, depend on the arrange¬ 
ment of the given points. The reader may with profit study the subject 
on the basis of the solution to Steiner's problem. We shall content our- 





Figs. 216>8. Shortett networks joining more than 3 pointe. 



STREET NETWORK PROBLEM 


361 


selves here with pointing out the answer in the typical cases shown in 
Figures 216-8. In the first case the solution consists of five segments with 
two multiple intersections where three segments meet at angles of 120®. 
In the second case the solution contains three multiple intersections. If 
the points are differently arranged, figures such as these may not be 
possible. One or more of the multiple intersections may degenerate 
and be replaced by one or more of the given points, as in the third case. 

In the case of n given points, there will be at most n — 2 multiple 
intersections, at each of which three segments meet at angles of 120®. 

The solution of the problem is not always uniquely determined. For 
four points A, B, C, Z) forming a square we have the two equivalent 
solutions shown in Figures 219-20. If the points Ai, A 2 , • • • , An are 




Figs. 219-20. Two shortest networks joining 4 points. 

the vertices of a simple polygon with sufficiently flat angles, then the 
polygon itself will give the minimum. 

§6. EXTREMA AND INEQUALITIES 

One of the characteristic features of higher mathematics is the impor¬ 
tant r61e played by inequalities. The solution of a maximum problem 
always leads, in principle, to an inequality which expresses the fact that 
the variable quantity under consideration is less than or at most equal 
to the maximum value provided by the solution. In many cases such 
inequalities have an independent interest. As an example we shall 
consider the important inequality between the arithmetical and geo¬ 
metrical means. 

1. The Arithmetical and Geometrical Mean of Two Positive Quantities 

We begin with a simple maximum problem which occurs very often 
in pure mathematics and its applications. In geometrical language it 
amounts to the following: Among all rectangles with a prescribed per- 



362 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


(VIIJ 


imeter, to find the one with largest area. The solution, as one might 
expect, is the square. To prove this we reason as follows. Let 2a bt 
the prescribed perimeter of the rectangle. Then the fixed sum of the 
lengths X and y of two adjacent edges is a: + y, while the variable are 
xy is to be made as large as possible. The “arithmetical mean” of 
and y is simply 


We shall also introduce the quantity 



so that 

X = m d, y m — d, 

and therefore 

xy = (m + d){m - d) = - d^ = ±yT _ d\ 

Since c? is greater than zero except when d = 0, we immediately obtain 
the inequality 

( 1 ) < * 4 ^, 

where the equality sign holds only when d_= 0 and x = y = m. 

Since x + y is fixed, it follows that \/xy, and therefore the area xy, 
is a maximum when x = y. The expression 

g = \/iy, 

where the positive square root is meant, is called the ‘‘geometrical 
mean^' of the positive quantities x and y; the inequality (1) expresses 
the fundamental relation between the arithmetical and geometrical 
means. 

The inequality (1) also follows directly from the fact that the ex¬ 
pression 

(\/x - \/yy :=z x + y - 2\/^ 

is necessarily non-negative, being a square, and is zero only for x ^ y. 

A geometrical derivation of the inequality may be given by con¬ 
sidering the fixed straight line x + 2 / = 2m in the plane, together with 



MEAN OF TWO POSITIVE QUANTITIES 


363 


the family of curves xy = c, where c is constant for each of these curves 
(hyperbolas) and varies from curve to curve. As is evident from Figure 



221, the curve with the greatest value of c having a point in common 
with the given straight line will be the hyperbola tangent to the line at 
the point a; = y = m; for this hyperbola, therefore, c = m*. Hence 



It should be remarked that any inequality, /(x, y) < g(x, v), can be 
read both ways and therefore gives rise to a maximum as well as to a 
minimum property. For example, (1) also expresses the fact that 
among all rectangles of given area the square has the least perimeter. 

2. Generalization to n Variables 

The inequality (1) between the arithmetical and geometrical means 
of two positive quantities can be extended to any number n of positive 
quantities, denoted by Xi, Xa, • • • , Xn . We call 

Xi + Xa + • • • + iCn 

fYl -- 

n 


their arithmetical mean, and 

q « •• • Xn 



364 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VII] 


their geometrical mean, where the positive nth root is meant. The 
general theorem states that 

( 2 ) g <m, 

and that g = m only if all the Xi are equal. 

Many different and ingenious proofs of this general result have been 
devised. The simplest way is to reduce it to the same reasoning used 
in Article 1 by setting up the following maximum problem: To partition 
a given positive quantity C into n positive parts, C = + • • • + Xn , 

so that the product P = XiX^ • • • x^ shall be as large as possible. We 
start with the assumption—apparently obvious, but analyzed later in 
§7—that a maximum for P exists and is attained by a set of values 


Xi — , • • • , — Un • 

All we have to prove is that ai = a 2 = • • • = an , for in this case g = m. 
Suppose this is not true—for example, that 015 *^ 02 . We consider the 
n quantities 


Xi ~ Sf X2 Sf Xs tts f * * * f > 


where 


„ _ ai + oi 

2 * 

In other words, we replace the quantities ai by another set in which 
only the first two are changed and made equal, while the total sum C 
is retained. We can write 


where 


ai = 5 -f- d, 02 = s — df 



The new product is 

P' - s *-03 • • • a„ , 

while the old product is 

P ““ (s I d) • (5 “■ d) • O 3 • • * On “ (s d ) • O 3 • • • On . 
so that obviously, unless d = 0, 

P < P’, 

contrary to the assumption that P was the maximum. Hence d = 0 
and Oi = Of. In the same way we can prove that oi = a<, where o< 



GENERALIZATION TO n VARIABLES 


365 


is any one of the a's; it follows that all the a*8 are equal. Since g ^ m 
when all the Xi are equal, and since we have shown that only this gives 
the maximum value of g, it follows that g < m otherwise, as stated in 
the theorem. 


3. The Method of Least Squares 


The arithmetical mean of n numbers, xi, •.. , Xn , which need not be 
assumed all positive in this article, has an important minimum prop¬ 
erty. Let u be an unknown quantity that we want to determine as 
accurately as possible with some measuring instrument. To this end 
we make a number n of readings which may yield slightly different 
results, Xi, • • • , Xn , due to various sources of experimental error. Then 
the question arises, what value of u is to be accepted as most trust¬ 
worthy? It is customary to select for this ^^true” or “optimal’^ value 


the arithmetical mean m = 


X\ • • • “f“ Xn 


n 


To give a real justification 


for this assumption one must enter into a detailed discussion of the 
theory of probability. But we can at least point out a minimum prop¬ 
erty of m which makes it a reasonable choice. Let u be any possible 
value for the quantity measured. Then the differences u — xi, • • • , 
u — Xn are the deviations of this value from the different readings. 
These deviations can be partly positive, partly negative, and the ten¬ 
dency will naturally be to assume as the optimal value for u one for 
which the total deviation is in some sense as small as possible. Follow¬ 
ing Gauss, it is customary to take, not the deviations themselves, but 
their squares, {u — x,)^, as appropriate measures of inaccuracy, and to 
choose as the optimal value among all the possible values for u one 
such that the sum of the squares of the deviations 


(u - Xi)** + (u - Xj)’ + . •. + (m - x„)* 


is as small as possible. This optimal value for u is exactly the arithmetic 
mean m, and it is this fact that constitutes the point of departure in 
Gausses important ^^method of least squares.^' We can prove the itali¬ 
cized statement in an elegant way. By writing 

(w - x<) = (m - Xi) + (w - m), 


we obtain 

(u — x,)^ = (m — Xi)* + (w — mf + 2 {m — x^{u — m). 



366 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


(VII) 


Now add all these equations for t = 1 , 2 , • • • , n. The last terms yield 
2 (w — m)(nm — Xi — • • • — *»), which is zero because of the definition 
of m; consequently we retain 

(ti - xi)* +... + («- x„y 

=» (m — *0* +••• + (»» — a:,)* + n(tn — uf. 

This shows that 

(u — Xi)* +••• + (« — x„)* > (m — Xi)’ + • • • + (ffi — Xnf, 

and that the equality sign holds only for u = m, which is exactly what 
we were to prove. 

The general method of least squares takes this result as a guiding 
principle in more complicated cases when the problem is to decide on a 
plausible result from slightly incompatible measurements. For example, 
suppose we have measured the coordinates of n points x,- , y,- of a 
theoretically straight line, and suppose that these measured points do 
not lie exactly on a straight line. How shall we draw the line that 
best fits the n observed points? Our previous result suggests the fol¬ 
lowing procedure, which, it is true, might be replaced by equally reason¬ 
able variants. Let y = ax + b represent the equation of the line, 
so that the problem is to find the coefficients a and b. The distance 
in the y direction from the line to the point x<, 2/4 is given by 
yt — (axi + b) = yi — axi — b, with a positive or negative sign accord¬ 
ing as the point is above or below the line. Hence the square of this 
distance is (y,- — aX{ — 6 )*, and the method is simply to determine a 
and b in such a way that the expression 

(yi - 0 x 1 - 6 )* + • •' + (j/n - ox„ - 6 )* 

attains its least possible value. Here we have a minimum problem in¬ 
volving two unknown quantities, a and b. The detailed discussion of 
the solution, though quite simple, is omitted here. 

§7. THE EXISTENCE OF AN EXTREMUM. 

DIRICHLET’S PRINCIPLE 

1. General Remarks 

In some of the previous extremum problems the solution is directly 
demonstrated to give a better result than any of its competitors. A 
striking instance is Schwarz's solution of the triangle problem, where we 
could see at once that no inscribed triangle has a perimeter smaller than 
that of the altitude triangle. Other examples are the minimum or 



GENERAL REMARKS 


367 


maximum problems whose solutions depend on an explicit inequality, 
such as that between the arithmetical and geometrical means. But in 
some of our problems we followed a different path. We began with the 
assumption that a solution had been found; then we analyzed this 
assumption and drew conclusions which eventually permitted a descrip¬ 
tion and construction of the solution. This was the case, for example, 
with the solution of Steiner's problem and with the second treatment of 
Schwarz's problem. The two methods are logically different. The 
first one is, in a way, more perfect, since it gives a more or less con¬ 
structive demonstration of the solution. The second method, as we 
saw in the case of the triangle problem, is likely to be simpler. But it 
is not so direct, and it is, above all, conditional in its structure, for it 
starts with the assumption that a solution to the problem exists. It 
gives the solution only provided that this is granted or proved. With¬ 
out this assumption it merely shows that if a solution exists, then it 
must have a certain character.! 

Because of the apparent obviousness of the premise that a solution 
exists, mathematicians until late in the nineteenth century paid no 
attention to the logical point involved, and assumed the existence of a 
solution to extremum problems as a matter of course. Some of the 
greatest mathematicians of the nineteenth century—Gauss, Dirichlet, 
and Riemann—used this assumption indiscriminately as the basis for 
deep and otherwise hardly accessible theorems in mathematical physicii 
and the theory of functions. The climax came when, in 1849, Riemann 
published his doctoral thesis on the foundations of the theory of func¬ 
tions of a complex variable. This concisely written paper, one of the 
great pioneering achievements of modern mathematics, was so com¬ 
pletely unorthodox in its approach to the subject that many people 
would have liked to ignore it. Weierstrass was then the foremost mathe¬ 
matician at the University of Berlin and the acknowledged leader in the 
building of a rigorous function theory. Impressed but somewhat doubt¬ 
ful, he soon discovered a logical gap in the paper which the author had 
not bothered to fill. Weierstrass' shattering criticism, though it did 
not disturb Riemann, resulted at first in an almost general neglect of kis 
theory. Riemann's meteoric career came to a sudden end after a few 
years with his death from consumption. But his ideas always found 

t The logical necessity of ascertaining the existence of an extremum is illus¬ 
trated by the following fallacy: 1 is the largest integer. For let us denote the 
largest integer by x. If x > 1, then x* > x, hence x could not be the largest 
integer. Therefore x must be equal to 1. 



368 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


IVIII 


some enthusiastic disciples, and fifty years after the publication of his 
thesis Hilbert finally succeeded in opening the way for a complete answer 
to the questions that he had left unsettled. This whole development in 
mathematics and mathematical physics became one of the great tri¬ 
umphs in the history of modern mathematical analysis. 

In Riemann^s paper the point open to critical attack is the question of 
the existence of a minimum. Riemann based much of his theory on 
what he called Dirichlet^s principle (Dirichlet had been Riemann's 
teacher at Goettingen, and had lectured but never written about this 
principle.) Let us suppose, for example, that part of a plane or of any 
surface is covered with tinfoil and that a stationary electric current is 
set up in the layer of tinfoil by connecting it at two points with the 
poles of an electric battery. There is no doubt that the physical experi¬ 
ment leads to a definite result. But how about the corresponding 
mathematical problem, which is of the utmost importance in function 
theory and other fields? According to the theory of electricity, the 
physical phenomenon is described by a ^^boundary value problem of a 
partial differential equation*^ It is this mathematical problem that con¬ 
cerns us; its solvability is made plausible by its assumed equivalence to 
a physical phenomenon but is by no means mathematically proved by 
this argument. Riemann disposed of the mathematical question in two 
steps. First he showed that the problem is equivalent to a minimum 
problem: a certain quantity expressing the energy of the electric flow is 
minimized by the actual flow in comparison to the other flows possible 
under the prescribed conditions. Then he stated as “Dirichlet’s prin¬ 
ciple” that such a minimum problem has a solution. Riemann took 
not the slightest step towards a mathematical proof of the second asser¬ 
tion, and this was the point attacked by Weierstrass Not only was the 
existence of the minimum not at all evident, but, as it turned out, it 
was an extremely delicate question for which the mathematics of that 
time was not yet prepared and which was finally settled only after many 
decades of intensive research. 


2. Examples 

We shall illustrate the sort of difficulty involved by two examples. 
1) We mark two points A and R at a distance d on a straight line L, 
and ask for the polygon of shortest length that starts at A in a direction 
perpendicular to L and ends at B. Since the straight segment AB is 
the shortest connection between A and B for all paths, we can be certain 
that any path admissible in the competition has a length greater than d. 



EXAMPLES 


369 


for the only path giving the value d is the straight segment AB, which 
violates the restriction imposed on the direction at A, and hence is not 
admissible under the terms of the problem. On the other hand, con- 

0 


O' 


A B ^ 

Fig. 222. 

sider the admissible path AOB in Figure 222. If we replace 0 by a 
point O' near enough to A, we can obtain an admissible path with a 
length differing as little from d as we like; hence if a shortest admissible 
path exists, it cannot have a length exceeding d and must therefore have 
the exact length d. But the only path of that length is not admissible, 
as we saw. Hence there can exist no shortest admissible path, and the 
proposed minimum problem has no solution. 

2) As in Figure 223, let C be a circle and S a point at a distance 1 
above its center. Consider the class of all surfaces bounded by C that 
go through the point S and lie above C in such 
a way that no two different points have the same 
vertical projection on the plane of C. Which of 
these surfaces has the least area? This problem, 
natural as it appears, has no solution: there is no 
admissible surface with a minimum area. If the 
condition that the surface go through S had not 
been prescribed, the solution would obviously be the 
plane circular disk bounded by C. Let us denote 
its area by A. Any other surface bounded by 
C must have an area larger than A. But we can 
find an admissible surface whose area exceeds A by 
as little as we please. For this purpose we take a conical surface of 
height 1 and so slender that its area is less than whatever margin may 
have been assigned. We place this cone on top of the disk with its ver¬ 
tex at S, and consider the total surface formed by the surface of the 
cone and the part of the disk outside the base of the cone. It is im¬ 
mediately clear that this surface, which deviates from the plane only 
near the center, has an area exceeding A by less than the given margin. 




370 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


Since this margin can be chosen as small as we like, it follows again 
that the minimum, if it exists, cannot be other than the area A of the 
disk. But among all the surfaces bounded by C only the disk itself has 
this area, and since the disk does not go through S it violates the con¬ 
ditions for admissibility. As a consequence, the problem has no solution. 

We can dispense with the more sophisticated examples given by Weier- 
strass. The two just considered show well enough that the existence of 
a minimum is not a trivial part of a mathematical proof. Let us put the 
matter in more general and abstract terms. Consider a definite class of 
objects, e.g. of curves or surfaces, to each of which is attached as a 
function of the object a certain number, e.g. length or area. If there 
is only a finite number of objects in the class, there must obviously be a 
largest and a smallest among the corresponding numbers. But if there 
are infinitely many objects in the class, there need be neither a largest 
nor a smallest number, even if all these numbers are contained between 
fixed bounds. In general, these numbers will form an infinite set of 
points on the number axis. Let us suppose, for simplicity, that all the 
numbers are positive. Then the set has a “greatest lower bound", 
that is, a point a below which no number of the set lies, and which is 
either itself an element of the set or is approached with any degree of 
accuracy by members of the set. If a belongs to the set, it is the smallest 
element; otherwise the set simply does not contain a smallest element. 
For example, the set of numbers 1, 1/2, 1/3, ... contains no smallest 
element, since the lower bound, 0, does not belong to the set. These 
examples illustrate in an abstract way the logical difficulties connected 
with the existence problem. The mathematical solution of a minimum 
problem is not complete until one has provided, explicitly or implicitlz, 
a proof that the set of values associated with the problem contains a 
smallest element. 


3. Elementary Extremum Problems 

In elementary problems it requires only an attentive analysis of the 
basic concepts involved to settle the question of the existence of a solu¬ 
tion. In Chapter VI, $5 the general notion of a compact set was dis¬ 
cussed; it was stated that a continuous function defined for the elements 
of a compact set always assumes a largest and a smallest value some¬ 
where in the set. In each of the elementary problems previously dis¬ 
cussed, the competing values can be regarded as the values of a function 
of one or severval ariables in a domain that is either compact or can 



ELEMENTARY EXTREMUM PROBLEMS 


371 


easily be made so without essential change in the problem. In such a 
case the existence of a maximum and a minimum is assured. In 
Steiner’s problem, for example, the quantity under consideration is the 
sum of three distances, and this depends continuously on the position 
of the movable point. Since the domain of this point is the whole plane, 
nothing is lost if we enclose the figure in a large circle and restrict the 
point to its interior and boundary. For as soon as the movable point is 
sufficiently far away from the three given points, the sum of its dis¬ 
tances to these points will certainly exceed AB -f AC, which is one of 
the admissible values of the function. Hence if there is a minimum for a 
point restricted to a large circle, this will also be the minimum for the 
unrestricted problem. But it is easy to show that the domain con¬ 
sisting of a circle plus its interior is compact, hence a minimum for 
Steiner’s problem exists. 

The importance of the assumption that the domain of the independent 
variable is compact can be shown by the following example. Given 
two closed curves Cx and Cj, there always exist two points. Px, Pi, on 
Cl, Cj respectively, which have the least possible distance from each 
other, and points Qx, Qi which have the largest possible distance. For 
the distance between a point Ax on Ci and a point At on Ct is a con¬ 
tinuous function on the compact set consisting of the pairs Ax , At of 




Fig. 224. Curves between which there is no longest or shortest distance. 


points under consideration. However, if the two curves are not bounded 
but extend to infinity, then the problem may not have a solution. In 
the ca^e shown in Figure 224 neither a smallest nor a largest distance 
between the curves is attained; the lower bound for the distance is zero, 
the upper bound is infinity, and neither is attained. In some cases a 
minimum but no maximum exists. For the case of two branches of a 
hyperbola (Fig. 17, p. 76) only a minimum distance is attained, by A and 
A since obviously no two points exist with a maximum distance apart. 



372 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


We can account for this difference in behavior by artificially restricting 
the domain of the variables. Select an arbitrary positive number R, 
and restrict x by the condition | x | < R. Then both a maximum and 
a minimum exist for each of the last two problems. In the first one, 
restricting the boundary in this way assures the existence of a maximum 
and a minimum distance, both of which are attained on the boundary. 
If R is increased, the points for which the extrema are attained are 
again on the boundary. Hence as R increases, these points disappear 
towards infinity. In the second case, the minimum distance is attained 
in the interior, and no matter how much R is increased the two points 
of minimum distance remain the same. 

4. Difficulties in Higher Cases 

While the existence question is not at all serious in the elementary 
problems involving one, two, or any finite number of independent vari¬ 
ables, it is quite different with Dirichlet^s principle or with even simpler 
problems of a similar type. The reason in these cases is either that the 
domain of the independent variable fails to be compact, or that the 
function fails to be continuous. In the first example of Article 2 we 
have a sequence of paths AO'B where 0' tends to the point A, Each 
path of the sequence satisfies the conditions of admissibility. But the 
paths AO'S tend to the straight segment AB and this limit is no longer 
in the admitted set. The set of admissible paths is in this respect like 
the interval 0 < x 1 for which Weierstrass^ theorem on extreme 
values does not hold (see p. 314). In the second example we find a 
similar situation: if the cones become thinner and thinner, then the se¬ 
quence of the corresponding admissible surfaces will tend to the disk 
plus a vertical straight line reaching to S. This limiting geometrical 
entity, however, is not among the admissible surfaces, and again it is 
true that the set of admissible surfaces is not compact. 

As an example of non-continuous dependence we may consider the 
length of a curve. This length is no longer a function of a finite number 
of numerical variables, since a whole curve cannot be characterized by a 
finite number of ‘‘coordinates,” and it is not a continuous function of 
the curve. To see this let us join two points A and B at a distance d 
by a zigzag polygon which together with the segment AB forms n 
equilateral triangles. It is clear from Figure 225 that the total length 
of Pn will be exactly 2d for every value of n. Now consider the sequence 
of polygons Pi , P 2 , • • • • The single waves of these polygons decrease 



DIFFICULTIES IN HIGHER CASES 


373 


in height as they increase in number, and it is clear that polygon Pn 
tends to the straight line AB, where, in the limit, the roughness has 
disappeared completely. The length of P„ is always 2d, regardless of 
the index n, while the length of the limiting curve, the straight segment, 
is only d. Hence the length does not depend continuously on the curve. 



WWW 

Fig. 225. Approximation to a seKmoiit t)y polyKon.s of twice it.s lenKth. 

All these examples confirm the fact that caution as to the existence 
of a solution is really necessary in minimum problems of a more complex 
structure. 


§8. thp: isoperimptfric problem 

That the circle encloses the largest area among all closed curves with a 
prescribed length is one of the ‘‘obvious’’ facts of mathematics for which 
only modern methods have yielded a rigorous proof. Steiner devised 
various ingenious ways of proving this theorem, of which we shall con¬ 
sider one. 

Let us start with the assumption that a solution does exist. This 
granted, suppose the curve C is the required one with the prescribed 
length L and maximum area. Then we can easily show that C must be 
convex, in the sense that the straight segment joining any two points 
of C must lie entirely inside or on C. For if C were not convex, as in 
Figure 226, then a segment such as OP could be drawn between some 
pair of points 0 and P on C, such that OP lies outside of C. The arc 
OQ'P which is the reflection of OQP in the line OP forms, together with 
the arc OPP, a curve of length L enclosing a larger area than the original 


874 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


IVII] 


curve C, since it includes the additional areas I and II. This contra* 
diets the assumption that C contains the largest area for a closed curve 
of length L. Hence C must be convex. 



Fig. 226 


Now choose two points, A, B, dividing the solution curve C into arcs 
of equal length. Then the line AB must divide the area of C into two 
equal parts, for otherwise the part of greater area could be reflected in 
AB (Fig. 227) to give another curve of length L with greater included 
area that C. It follows that half of the solution C must solve the 
following problem: To find the arc of length L/2 having its endpoints 
A, B oa a straight line and enclosing a maximum area between it and 



Fig. 227 


this straight line. Now we shall show that the solution to this new 
problem is a semicircle, so that the whole curve C solving the iso- 
perimetric problem is a circle. Let the arc AOB solve the new problem. 
It is sufficient to show that every inscribed angle such as X^AOB in 
Figure 228 is a right angle, for this will prove that AOB is a semicircle. 
Suppose, on the contrary, that the angle AOB is not 90®. Then we can 
replace Figure 228 by another one, 229, in which the shaded areas and 



THE I80PERIMETRIC PROBLEM 


375 


the length of the arc AOB are not changed, while the triangular area is 
increased by making 3^ AOB equal to or at least nearer to 90°. Thus 
Figure 229 gives a larger area than the original (see page 330). But we 
started with the assumption that Figure 228 solves the problem so that 
Figure 229 could not possibly yield a larger area. This contradiction 
shows that for every point 0, 3^AOB must be a right angle, and this 
completes the proof. 

The isoperimetric property of the circle can be expressed in the form 
of an inequality. If L is the circumference of the circle, its area is 
and therefore we must have the iaoperimetric inequality, A < 
I?!At, between the area A and length L of any closed curve the equality 
sign holding only for the circle. 

*As is apparent from the discussion in §7, Steiner’s proof has only a 
conditional value: “If there is a curve of length L within maximal area 



A BA B 


Fig. 22« Fig. 229 

then it must be a circle.” To establish the hypothetical premise an 
essentially new argument is needed. First we prove an elementary 
theorem concerning closed polygons P„ with an even number 2 n of 
edges: Among all such 2n-gons with the same length, the regular 2n-gon 
has the largest area. The proof follows the pattern of Steiner’s reasoning 
with the following modifications. There is no difficulty about the ques¬ 
tion of existence here, since a 2n-gon, together with its length and area, 
depends continuously on the An coordinates of its vertices, which may 
without loss of generality be restricted to a compact set of points in 
4n-dimentional space. Accordingly, in this problem for polygons we 
may safely begin with the assumption that some polygon P is the solu¬ 
tion, and on this basis analyze the properties of P. Exactly as in 
Steiner’s proof, it follows that P must be convex. We prove now that 
all the 2n edges of P must have the same length. For assume that two 
adjacent edges AB and BC had different lengths; then we could cut off 
triangle ABC from P and replace it by an isosceles triangle AB'C, in 



376 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


IVIII 


which AS' + B'C = AB + SC, and which has a larger area (see §1). 
Thus we would obtain a polygon P' with the same perimeter and a 
larger area, contrary to the assumption that P 
was the optimal polygon of 2n edges. Therefore 
all the edges of P must have equal length, and 
what remains to be shown is that P is regular; for 
this it suflSces to know that all the vertices of P lie 
on a circle. The reasoning follows Steiner^s 
pattern. First we show that any diagonal joining 
opposite vertices, e.g. the first with the (n + l)-st, 
cuts the area in two equal parts. Then we prove 
that all the vertices of one of these parts 
lie on a semicircle. The details, which follow 
exactly the previous pattern, are left to the reader as an ex¬ 
ercise. 

The existence, together with the solution, of the isoperimetric problem 
can now be obtained by a limiting process in which the number of 
vertices tends to infinity and the optimal regular polygon to a circle. 

Steiner's reasoning is not at all suited to proving the corresponding 
isoperimetric property of the sphere in three dimensions. A somewhat 
different and more complicated treatment was given by Steiner that 
works for three dimensions as w^ell as for two, but since it cannot be so 
immediately adapted to giving the existence proof it is omitted here. 
As a matter of fact, proving the isoperimetric property of the sphere 
is a much harder task than for the circle; indeed, a complete and rigorous 
proof was first given much later, in a rather difficult paper by H. A. 
Schwarz. The three-dimensional isoperimetric property can be ex¬ 
pressed by the inequality 

36iry* < A* 

between the surface area A and the volume V of any closed three- 
dimensional body, the equality holding only for the sphere. 

•§9. EXTREMUM PROBLEMS WITH BOUNDARY CONDI¬ 
TIONS. CONNECTION BETWEEN STEINER’S PROB¬ 
LEM AND THE ISOPERIMETRIC PROBLEM 

Interesting results arise in extremum problems when the domain of 
the variable is restricted by boundary conditions. The theorem of 
Weierstrass that in a compact domain a continuous function attains a 
largest and smallest value does not exclude the possibility that the ex- 




PROBLEMS WITH BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 


377 


treme values are attained at the boundary of the domain. A simple, 
almost trivial, example is afforded by the function u = x. If x is not 
restricted and may range from — oo to + oo, then the domain B of the 
independent variable is the entire number axis; and hence it is under¬ 
standable that the function u = x has no largest or smallest value any¬ 
where. But if the domain B is limited by boundaries, say 0 < x < 1, 
then there exists a largest value, 1, attained at the right endpoint, and 
a smallest value, 0, attained at the left endpoint. However, these ex¬ 
treme values are not represented by a summit or a depression in the 
curve of the function; they are not extrema relative to a full two-sided 
neighborhood. They change as soon as the interval is extended, be¬ 
cause they remain at the endpoints. For a genuine peak or depression 
of a function, the extremal character always refers to a full neighborhood 
of the point where the value is attained; it is not affected by slight 
changes of the boundary. Such an extremum persists even under a 
free variation of the independent variable in the domain JS, at least in a 
sufficiently small ne^'ghborhood. The distinction between such ‘Tree^^ 
extrema and those assumed at the boundary is illuminating in many 
apparently quite different contexts. For functions of one variable, of 
course, the distinction is simply that between monotone and non-mono- 
tone functions, and thus does not lead to particularly interesting ob¬ 
servations. But there are many significant instances of extrema 
attained at the boundary of the domain of variability by functions of 
several variables. 

This may occur, for example, in Schwarz^s triangle problem. There 
the domain of variability of the three independent variables consists of 
all triples of points, one on each of the three sides of the triangle ABC, 
The solution of the problem involved two alternatives: either the mini¬ 
mum is attained when all three of the independently variable points 
P, Qj R lie inside the respective sides of the triangle, in which case the 
minimum is given by the altitude triangle, or the minimum is attained 
for the boundary position when two of the points P, Q, R coincide with 
the common endpoint of their respective intervals, in which case the 
minimum inscribed “triangle” is the altitude from this vertex, counted 
twice. Thus the character of the solution is quite different according 
to which of the alternatives occurs. 

In Steiner's problem of the three villages the domain of variability of 
the point P is the whole plane, of which the three given points A, B, C 
may be considered as boundary points. Again there are two alternatives 
yielding two entirely different types of solutions: either the minimum is 



378 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


(VIII 


attained in the interior of the triangle ABC^ which is the case of the 
three equal angles, or it is attained at a boundary point C, A similar 
pair of alternatives exists for the complementary problem. 

As a last example we may consider the isoperimetric problem modified 
by restrictive boundary conditions. We shall thus obtain a surprising 
connection between the isoperimetric problem and Steiner^s problem 
and at the same time what is perhaps the simplest instance of a new type 
of extremum problem. In the original problem the independent varia- 
able, the closed curve of given length, can be arbitrarily varied from the 
circular shape, and any such deformed curve is admissible into the 
competition, so that we have a genuine free minimum. Now let us 
consider the following modified problem: the curves C under considera¬ 
tion shall include in their interior, or pass through, three given points, P, 
Q, Rj the area A is prescribed, and the length L is to be made a minimum. 
This represents a genuine boundary condition. 

It is clear that, if A is prescribed sufficiently large, the three points 
P, Q, R will not aflFect the problem at all. Whenever the circle circum¬ 
scribed about the triangle PQR has an area less than or equal to A, the 
solution will simply be a circle of area A including the three points. 
But what if A is smaller? We state the answer here but omit the some¬ 
what detailed proof, although it would not be beyond our reach. Let 
us characterize the solutions for a sequence of values of A which de¬ 
creases to zero. As soon as A falls below the area of the circumscribed 
circle, the original isoperimetric circle breaks up into three arcs, all 
having the same radius, which form a convex circular triangle with 




PROBLEMS WITH BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 


379 


P, Q, R as vertices (Fig. 232). This triangle is the solution; its dimen¬ 
sions can be determined from the given value of ^4. If A decreases 
further, the radius of these arcs will increase, and the arcs will become 
more and more nearly straight, until when A is exactly the area of the 
triangle PQR the solution is the triangle itself. If A now becomes 
even smaller, then the solution will again consist of three circular arcs 
having the same radius and forming a triangle with comers at P, Q, R. 
This time, however, the triangle is concave and the arcs are inside the 
triangle PQR (Fig. 233). As A continues to decrease, there will come 
a moment when, for a certain value of A, two of the concave arcs become 
tangent to each other in a corner P. With an additional decrease of A, 
it is no longer possible to constmct a circular triangle of the previous 
type. A new phenomenon occurs: the solution is still given by a con¬ 
cave circular triangle, but one of its corners P' has become detached 
from the corresponding corner P, and the solution now consists of a 
circular triangle PQP' plus the straight line PP' counted twice (because 
it travels from P' to P and back). This straight segment is tangent to 
the two arcs tangent to each other at P'. If A decreases further, the 
separation process will also set in at the other vertices. Eventually we 
obtain as solution a circular triangle consisting of three arcs of equal 
radius tangent to each other and forming an equilateral circular triangle 
P'Q'P', and in addition three doubly counted straight segments P'P, 
Q'Q, P'P (Fig. 234). If, finally, A shrinks to zero, then the circular 
triangle reduces to a point, and we return to the solution of Steiner’s 
problem; the latter is thus seen to be a limiting case of the modified 
isoperimetric problem. 

If P, Q, P form an obtuse triangle with an angle of more than 120°, 
then the shrinking process leads to the corresponding solution of Steiner’s 
problem, for then the circular arcs shrink toward the obtuse vertex. 
The solutions of the generalized Steiner problem (see Figs. 216-8 on p. 
360) may be obtained by limiting processes of a similar nature. 

§10. THE CALCULUS OF VARIATIONS 

1. Introduction 

The isoperimetric problem is one example, probably the oldest, of a 
large class of important problems to which attention was called in 1696 
by Johann Bernoulli. In Acta Eruditorumj the great scientific journal 
of the time, he posed the following ''brachistochrone” problem: Imagine 
a particle constrained to slide without friction along a certain curve 
joining a point A to a lower point B. If the particle is allowed to fall 



380 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VIII 


under the influence of gravity alone, along which such curve will the 
time required for the descent be least? It is easy to see that the falling 
particle will require different lengths of time for different paths. The 
straight line by no means affords the quickest journey, nor is the circular 
arc or any other elementary curve the answer. Bernoulli boasted of 
having a wonderful solution which he would not immediately publish 
in order to incite the greatest mathematicians of the time to try their 
skill at this new type of mathematical question. In particular, he 
challenged his elder brother Jacob, with whom he was at the time en¬ 
gaged in a bitter feud, and whom he publicly described as incompetent, 
to solve the problem. Mathematicians immediately recognized the 
different character of the brachistochrone problem. While heretofore, 
in problems treated by the differential calculus, the quantity to be mini¬ 
mized depended only on one or more numerical variables, in this problem 
the quantity under consideration, the time of descent, depends on the 



Fig. 236. Tho cycloid. 


whole curve^ and this makes for an essential difference, taking the problem 
out of the reach of the differential calculus or any other method known 
at the time. 

The novelty of the problem—apparently the isoperimetric property 
of the circle was not clearly recognized as of the same nature— fascinated 
the contemporary mathematicians all the more when the solution turned 
out to be the cycloid, a curve that had just been discovered. (We 
recall the definition of the cycloid: it is the locus of a point on the circum¬ 
ference of a circle that rolls without slipping along a straight line, as 
shown in Fig. 236.) This curve had been brought into connection with 
interesting mechanical problems, especially with the construction of an 
ideal pendulum. Huygens had discovered that an ideal mass point 
which oscillates without friction under the influence of gravity on a 
vertical cycloid has a period of oscillation independent of the amplitude 
of the motion. On a circular path, such as is provided by an ordinary 
pendulum, this independence is only approximately true, and this was 




INTRODUCTION 


381 


considered a drawback to the use of pendulums for precision clocks. 
The cycloid was honored by the name of tautochrone; now it acquired 
the new title of brachistochrone. 

2. The Calculus of Variations. Fermat’s Principle in Optics 

Of the different ways in which the solution to the brachistochrone 
problem was found by the Bernoullis and others we shall presently ex¬ 
plain one of the most original. The first methods were of a more or less 
special character, adapted to the specific problem. But it did not take 
long before Euler and Lagrange (1736-1813) evolved more general meth¬ 
ods for solving extremum problems in which the independent element 
was not a single numerical variable or a finite number of such variables, 
but a whole curve or function or even a system of functions. The new 


P 



Fig. 237. Fefration of a light ray. 


method for solving such problems was called the calculus of 
variations. 

It is not possible to describe here the technical aspects of this branch 
of mathematics or to go deeper into the discussion of specific problems. 
The calculus of variations has many applications in physics. It was ob¬ 
served long ago that natural phenomena often follow some pattern of 
maxima and minima. As we have seen, Heron of Alexandria recognized 
that the reflection of a liglit ray in a plane mirror can be described by a 
minimum principle. Fermat, in the seventeenth century, took the next 
step: he observed that the law of refraction of light can also be stated 
in terms of a minimum principle. It is well known that the path of 
light travelling from one homogeneous medium into another is bent at 
the boundary. Thus in Figure 237, a light ray going from P in the 
upper medium where the velocity is t; to P in the lower medium where 



382 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[ VII1 


the velocity is w will follow a path PQR. The empirical law found by 
Snell (1591-1626) states that the path consists of two straight segments, 
PQ and QR, forming angles a, a' with the normal determined by the 
conditions sin a/sin a' = vlw. By means of the calculus Fermat proved 
that this path is such that the time taken for the light ray to go from P 
to P is a minimum, i.e. smaller than it would be along any other con¬ 
necting path. Thus Heron’s law of reflection was supplemented sixteen 
hundred years later by a similar and equally important law of refraction. 

Fermat generalized the statement of this law so as to include curved 
surfaces of discontinuity between media, such as the spherical surfaces 
used in lenses. In this case the statement still holds that light fellows 
a path along which the time taken is a minimum relative to the time 
that would be required for the light to describe any other possible path 
between the same two points. Finally, Fermat considered any optical 
system in which the velocity of light varies in a prescribed way from 
point to point, jis it does in the atmosphere. He divided the con¬ 
tinuous inhomogeneous medium into thin slabs, in each of which the 
velocity of light is approximately constant, and imagined this medium 
replaced by another in which the velocity is actually constant in each 
slab. Then he could again apply his principle, going from each slab to 
the next. By letting the thickness of the slabs tend to zero, he arrived 
at the general Fermat principle of geometrical optics'. In an inhomogeneous 
medium, a light ray travelling between two points follows a path along 
which the time taken is a minimum with respect to all paths joining the 
two points. This principle has been of the utmost importance, not only 
theoretically, but in practical geometrical optics. The technique of the 
calculus of variations applied to this principle provides the basis for 
calculating lens systems. 

Minimum principles have also become dominant in other branches of 
physics. It was observed that stable equilibrium of a mechanical sys¬ 
tem is attained if the system is arranged in such a way that its “potential 
energy’’ is a minimum. As an example, let us consider a flexible homo¬ 
geneous chain suspended at its two ends and allowing full play to the 
force of gravity. The chain will then assume a form in which its potential 
energy is a minimum. In this case the potential energy is determined 
by the height of the center of gravity above some fixed axis. The 
curve in which the chain hangs is called a catenary, and resembles super¬ 
ficially a parabola. 

Not only the laws of equilibrium, but also those of motion, are domi¬ 
nated by maximum and minimum principles. It was Euler who ob- 



CALCULUS OF VARIATIONS 


383 


tained the first clear ideas about these principles, while philosophically 
and mystically inclined speculators, such as Maupertuis (1698-1759), 
were not able to separate the mathematical statements from hazy ideas 
about ‘'God's intention to regulate physical phenomena by a general 
principle of highest perfection." Euler's variational principles of phys¬ 
ics, rediscovered and extended by the Irish mathematician W. R. 
Hamilton (1805-1865), have proved to be among the most powerful 
tools in mechanics, optics, and electrodynamics, with many applications 
to engineering. Recent developments in physics—relativity and quan¬ 
tum theory—are full of examples revealing the power of the calculus of 
variations. 

3. Bernoulli's Treatment of the Brachistochrone Problem 

The early method developed for the brachistochrone problem by Jacob 
Bernoulli can be understood with comparatively little technical knowl¬ 



edge. We start with the fact, taken from mechanics, that a mass point 
falling from rest at A along any curve C will have at any point P a 
velocity proportional to \/h, where h is the vertical distance from A 
to P; that is, t; = c\/h, where c is a constant. Now we replace the 
given problem by a slightly different one. We dissect the space into 
many thin horizontal slabs, each of thickness d, and assume for the 
moment that the velocity of the moving particle changes, not continu¬ 
ously, but in little jumps from slab to slab, so tha^ in the first slab 
adjacent to A the velocity is c\/d, in the second and in the nth 

slab c\/ni = cy/hy where h is the vertical distance from ^4 to P (see 
Fig. 238). If this problem is considered, then there are really only a 
finite number of variables. In each slab the path must be a straight 
segment, no existence problem arises, the solution must be a polygon, 
and the only question is how to determine its corners. According to the 
minimum principle for the law of simple refraction, in each pair of sue- 






384 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[VII] 


cessive slabs the motion from P to iB by way of Q must be such that, 
with P and /? fixed, Q provides the shortest possible time. Hence the 
following ‘^refraction law’* must hold; 

sin a _ sin a' 

's/nd \/(n+ l)d 

Repeated application of this reasoning yields the succession of equalities 
sin ai __ sin oc 2 __ 

where an is the angle between the polygon in the nth slab and the ver¬ 
tical. 

Now Bernoulli imagines the thickness d to become smaller and smaller, 
tending to zero, so that the polygon just obtained as the solution of the 
approximate problem tends to the desired solution of the original prob¬ 
lem. In this passage to the limit the equalities (1) are not aifected, and 
therefore Bernoulli concludes that the solution must be a curve C with 
the following property: If a is the angle between the tangent and the 
vertical at any point P of C, and h is the vertical distance of P from 
the horizontal line through A, then sin ajy/h is constant for all points 
P of C. It can be shown very simply that this property characterizes 
the cycloid. 

Bernoulli’s “proof” is a typical example of ingenious and valuable 
mathematical reasoning which, at the same time, is not at all rigorous. 
There are several tacit assumptions in the argument, and their justifica¬ 
tion would be more complicated and lengthy than the argument itself. 
For example, the existence of a solution C, and the fact that the solution 
of the approximate problem approximates the actual solution, were both 
assumed. The question as to the intrinsic value of heuristic considera¬ 
tions of this type certainly deserves discussion, but would lead us too 
far astray. 

4. Geodesics on a Sphere. Geodesics and Maxi-Minima 

In the introduction to this chapter we mentioned the problem of 
finding the shortest arcs joining two given points of a surface. On a 
sphere, as is shown in elementary geometry, these “geodesics” are arcs of 
great circles. Let P and Q be two (not diametrically opposite) points 
on a sphere, and c the shorter connecting arc of the great circle through 
P and Q. Then the question presents itself, what is the longer arc c' 
of the same great circle? Certainly it does not give the minimum 



GEODESICS ON A SPHERE 


885 


length, nor can it give the maximum length for curves joining P and Q, 
since arbitrarily long curves between P and Q can be drawn. The 
answer is that c' solves a maxi-minimum problem. Consider a point 
S on a fixed great circle separating P and Q; we ask for the shortest 
connection between P and Q on the sphere passing through S. Of 
course, the minimum is given by a curve consisting of two small arcs of 
great circles PS and QS. Now we seek a position of the point S for 
which this smallest distance PSQ becomes as large as possible. The 
solution is: S must be such that PSQ is the longer arc c' of the great 



circle PQ. We may modify the problem by first seeking the path of 
shortest length from P to Q passing through n prescribed points. Si , 
>^ 2 , * * • , Sn , on the sphere, and then seeking to determine the points 
Si, • • • , Sn so that this minimum length becomes as large as possible. 
The solution is given by a path on the great circle joining P and Q, but 
this path winds around the sphere so often that it passes through the 
points diametrically opposite P and Q exactly n times. 

This example of a maximum-minimum problem is typical of a wide 
class of questions in the calculus of variations that have been studied 
with great success by methods developed by Morse and others. 

§11. EXPERIMENTAL SOLUTIONS OF MINIMUM PROBLEMS. 
SOAP FILM EXPERIMENTS 

1. Introduction 

It is usually very difficult, and sometimes impossible, to solve varia¬ 
tional problems explicitly in terms of formulas or geometrical construe- 



386 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


tVIIl 


tions involving known simple elements. Instead, one is often satisfied 
with merely proving the existence of a solution under certain conditions 
and afterwards investigating properties of the solution. In many cases, 
when such an existence proof turns out to be more or less difficult, it is 
stimulating to realize the mathematical conditions of the problem by 
corresponding physical devices, or rather, to consider the mathematical 
problem as an interpretation of a physical phenomenon. The existence 
of the physical phenomenon then represents the solution of the mathe¬ 
matical problem. Of course, this is only a plausibility consideration and 
not a mathematical proof, since the question still remains whether the 
mathematical interpretation of the physical event is adequate in a strict 
sense, or whether it gives only an inadequate image of physical reality. 
Sometimes such experiments, even if performed only in the imagina¬ 
tion, are convincing even to mathematicians. In the nineteenth century 
many of the fundamental theorems of function theory were discovered 
by Riemann by thinking of simple experiments concerning the flow 
of electricity in thin metallic sheets. 

In this section we wish to discuss, on the basis of experimental demon¬ 
strations, one of the deeper problems of the calculus of variations. This 
problem has been called Plateau^s problem, because Plateau (1801-1883), 
a Belgian physicist, made interesting experiments on this subject. The 
problem itself is much older and goes back to the initial phases of the 
calculus of variations. In its simplest form it is the following: to find 
the surface of smallest area bounded by a given closed contour in space. 
We shall also discuss experiments connected with some related ques¬ 
tions, and it will turn out that much light can thus be thrown on some 
of our previous results as well as on certain mathematical problems of a 
new type, 

2. Soap Film Experiments 

Mathematically, Plateau's problem is connected with the solution of 
a ‘‘partial differential equation," or a system of such equations. Euler 
showed that all (non-plane) minimal surfaces must be saddle-shaped and 
that the mean curvaturef at every point must be zero. The solution 
was shown to exist for many special cases during the last century, but 

t I'he mean curvature of a surface at a point P is defined in the following? way: 
Consider the perpendicular to the surface at P, and all planes containing it. These 
planes will intersect the surface in curves which in general have different curva¬ 
tures at P. Now consider the curves of minimum and maximum curvature 
respectively. (In general, the planes containing these curves will be perpen- 



SOAP FILM EXPERIMENTS 


387 


the existence of the solution for the general case was proved only 
recently, by J. Douglas and by T. Radd. 

Plateau’s experiments immediately yield physical solutions for very 
general contours. If one dips any closed contour made of wire into a 
liquid of low surface tension and then withdraws it, a film in the form 
of a minimal surface of least area will span the contour. (We assume 
that we may neglect gravity and other forces which interfere with the 
tendency of the film to assume a position of stable equilibrium by 
attaining the smallest possible area and thus the least possible value of 
the potential energy due to surface tension.) A good recipe for such a 
liquid is the following: Dissolve 10 grams of pure dry sodium oleate in 



Fig. 240. Cubic frame spanning a soap film system of 13 nearly plane surfaoee. 


500 grams of distilled water, and mix 15 cubic units of the solution with 
11 cubic units of glycerin. Films obtained with this solution and with 
frames of brass wire are relatively stable. The frames should not 
exceed five or six inches in diameter. 

With this method it is very easy to ‘'solve'' Plateau's problem simply 
by shaping the wire into the desired form. Beautiful models are ob¬ 
tained in polygonal wire frames formed by a sequence of edges of a 
regular polyhedron. In particular, it is interesting to dip the whole 
frame of a cube into such a solution. The result is first a system of 
different surfaces meeting each other at angles of 120® along lines of 
intersection. (If the cube is withdrawn carefully, there will be thirteen 
nearly plane surfaces.) Then .we may pierce and destroy enough of 

dicular to each other.) One-half the sum of these two curvatures is the mean 
curvature of the surface at P. 




388 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


VII 


these different surfaces so that only one surface bounded by a closed 
polygon remains. Several beautiful surfaces may be formed in this 
way. The same experiment can also be performed with a tetrahedron. 

3. New Experiments on Plateau’s Problem 

The scope of soap film experiments with minimal surfaces is wider 
than these original demonstrations by Plateau. In recent years the 
problem of minimal surfaces has been studied when not only one but 
any number of contours is prescribed, and when, in addition, the 
topological structure of the surface is more complicated. For example, 
the surface might be one-sided or of genus different from zero. These 
more general problems produce an amazing variety of geometrical 



phenomena that can be exhibited by soap film experiments. In this 
connection it is very useful to make the wire frames flexible, and to 
study the effect of deformations of the prescribed boundaries on the 
solution. 

We shall describe several examples: 

1) If the contour is a circle we obtain a plane circular disk. If we 
continuously deform the boundary circle we might expect that the 
minimal surface would always retain the topological character of a disk. 
This is not the case. If the boundary is deformed into the shape 
indicated by Figure 241, we obtain a minimal surface that is no longer 
simply connected, like the disk, but is a one-sided Moebius strip. Con¬ 
versely, we might start with this frame and with a soap film in the shape 


NEW EXPERIMENTS ON PLATEAU*S PROBLEM 


389 


of a Moebius strip. We may deform the wire frame by pulling handles 
soldered to it (Fig. 241). In this process we shall reach a moment when 
suddenly the topological character of the film changes, so that the sur¬ 
face is again of the type of a simply connected disk (Fig. 242). Re¬ 
versing the deformation we again obtain a Moebius strip. In this 
alternating deformation process the mutation of the simply connected 
surface into the Moebius strip takes place at a later stage. This shows 
that there must be a range of shapes of the contour for which both the 
Moebius strip and the simply connected surface are stable, i.e. furnish 
relative minima. But when the Moebius strip has a much smaller area 
than the other surface, the latter is too unstable to be formed. 

2) We may span a minimal surface of revolution between two circles. 
After the withdrawal of the wire frames from the solution we find, not 
one simple surface, but a structure of three 
surfaces meeting at angles of 120°, one of 
which is a simple circular disk parallel to the 
prescribed boundary circles (Figure 243). 

By destroying this intermediate surface the 
classical catcnoid is produced (the catenoid 
is the surface obtained by revolving the cat¬ 
enary of page 382 about a line perpendicular 
to its axis of symmetry). If the two bound¬ 
ary circles are pulled apart, there is a mo¬ 
ment when the doubly connected minimal 
surface (the catenoid) becomes unstable. At 
this moment the catenoid jumps discontinu- surfaces, 

ously into two separated disks. This process is, of course, not reversible. 

3) Another significant example is provided by the frame of Figures 
244-6 in which can be spanned three different minimal surfaces. Each 
is bounded by the same simple closed curve; one (Figure 244) has the 
genus 1, while the other two are simply connected, and in a way sym¬ 
metrical to each other. The latter have the same area if the contour is 
completely symmetrical. But if this is not the case then only one gives 
the absolute minimum of the area while the other will give a relative 
minimum, provided that the minimum is sought among simply connected 
surfaces. The possibility of the solution of genus 1 depends on the fact 
that by admitting surfaces of genus 1 one may obtain a smaller area 
than by requiring that the surface be simply connected. By deforming 
the frame we must, if the deformation is radical enough, come to a point 
where this is no longer true. At that moment the surface of genus 1 




390 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


fVIlJ 


becomes more and more unstable and suddenly jumps discontinuously 
into the simply connected stable solution represented by Figure 245 or 
246. If we start with one of these simply connected solutions, such as 
Figure 246, we may deform it in such a way that the other simply 
connected solution of Figure 245 becomes much more stable. The 
consequence is that at a certain moment a discontinuous transition 
from one to the other will take place. By slowly reversing the deforma- 



FUt. 244. 



Fig. 24S. 



Fig. 240. 


Frame spanuiag three different surfacee of genue 0 and 1. 



Fig. 247. 

One'iided minimal surface of higher topological structure in a single contour. 


tion, we return to the initial position of the frame, but now with the 
other solution in it. We can repeat the process in the opposite direction, 
and in this way swing back and forth by discontinuous transitions 
between the two types. By careful handling, one may also transform 
discontinuously either one of the simply connected* solutions into that of 
genus 1. For this purpose we have to bring the disk-like parts very close 




NEW EXPERIMENTS ON PLATEAU'S PROBLEM 


391 


to each other, so that the surface of genus 1 becomes markedly more 
stable. Sometimes in this process intermediate pieces of film appear 
first and have to be destroyed before the surface of genus 1 is obtained. 

This example shows not only the possibility of different solutions of 
the same topological type, but also of another and different type in 
one and the same frame; moreover, it again illustrates the possibility of 
discontinuous transitions from one solution to another while the condi¬ 
tions of the problem are changed continuously. It is easy to construct 
more complicated models of the same sort and to study their behavior 
experimentally. 

An interesting phenomenon is the appearance of minimal surfaces 
bounded by two or more interlocked closed curves. For two circles 
we obtain the surface shown in Figure 248. If, in this example, the 
circles are perpendicular to each other and the 
line of intersection of their planes is a dia¬ 
meter of both circles, there will be two sym¬ 
metrically opposite forms of this surface with 
equal area. If the circles are now moved 
slightly with respect to each other, the form 
will be altered continuously, although for each 
position only one form is an absolute mini¬ 
mum, and the other one a relative minimum. 

If the circles are moved so that the relative 
minimum is formed, it will jump over into 
the absolute minimum at some point. Here 
both of the possible minimal surfaces have the same topological character, 
as do the surfaces of Figures 245-6 one of which can be made to jump 
into the other by a slight deformation of the frame. 

4. Experimental Solutions of Other Mathematical Problems 

Owing to the action of surface tension, a film of liquid is in stable equi¬ 
librium only if its area is a minimum. This is an inexhaustible source of 
mathematically significant experiments. If parts of the boundary of a 
film are left free to move on given surfaces such as planes, then on these 
boundaries the film will be perpendicular to the prescribed surface. 

We can use this fact for striking demonstrations of Steiner^s problem 
and its generalizations (see §5). Two parallel glass or transparent 
plastic plates are joined by three or more perpendicular bars. If we 
immerse this object in a soap solution and withdraw it, the film forms a 



392 


AlAXIMA AND MINIMA 


[viir 


system of vertical planes between the plates and joining the fixed bars. 
The projection appearing on the glass plates is the solution of the prob¬ 
lem discussed on page 359. 




If the plates are not parallel, the bars not perpendicular to them, or 
the plates curved, then the curves formed by the film on the plates will 
not be straight, but will illustrate new variational problems. 




SOLUTIONS OF MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS 


393 


The appearance of lines where three sheets of a minimal surface meet 
at angles of 120® may be regarded as the generalization to more dimen¬ 
sions of the phenomena connected with Steiner’s problem. This 
becomes clear e.g. if we join two points 4, B in space by three curves, 
and study the corresponding stable system of soap films. As the sim¬ 
plest case we take for one curve the straight segment AJ5, and for the 



Fig. 251. Three surfeces meeting at 120* spanned between three wires joining two points. 



Fig. 252. Three broken lines joining two points. 


others two congruent circular arcs. The result is shown in Figure 251. 
If the planes of the arcs form an angle of less than 120®, we obtain three 
surfaces meeting at angles of 120®; if we turn the two arcs, increasing 
the included angle, the solution changes continuously into two plane 
circular segments. 


394 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


I VIII 


Now let us join A and B by three more complicated curves. As an 
example we may take three broken lines each consisting of three edges 
of the same cube that join two diagonally opposite vertices: we ob¬ 
tain three congruent surfaces meeting in the diagonal of the cube. (We 
obtain this system of surfaces from that depicted in Fig. 240 by destroy¬ 
ing the films adjacent to three properly selected edges.) If we make the 
three broken lines joining A and B movable, we can see the line of 
threefold intersection become curved. The angles of 120® will be 
preserved (Fig. 252). 

All the phenomena where three minimal surfaces meet in certain lines 
are fundamentally of a similar nature. They are generalizations of the 
plane problem of joining n points by the shortest system of lines. 



Fig. 26S. Demonstration that the oirde has least perimeter for a given area. 


Finally, a word about soap bubbles. The spherical soap bubble shows 
that among all closed surfaces including a given volume (defined by 
the amount of air inside), the sphere has the least area. If we consider 
soap bubbles of given volume which tend to contract to a minimum 
area but which are restricted by certain conditions, then the resulting 
surfaces will be not spheres, but surfaces of constant mean curvature, of 
which spheres and circular cylinders are special examples. 

For example, we blow a soap bubble between two parallel glass plates 
which have previously been wetted by the soap solution. When the 
bubble touches one plate, it suddenly assumes the shape of a hemisphere; 
as soon as it also touche's the other plate, it jumps into the shape of a 
circular cylinder, thus demonstrating the isoperimetric property of the 








SOLUTIONS OF MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS 


395 


circle in a most striking way. The fact that the soap film adjusts itself 
vertically to the bounding surface is the key to this experiment. By 
blowing soap bubbles between two plates with perpendicular connecting 
rods, we can illustrate the problems discussed on pp. 378-9. 

We can study the behavior of the solution of the isoperimetric problem 
by increasing or decreasing the amount of air in the bubble, using a tube 
with a fine point. By sucking out air, however, we do not obtain the 
figures of page 378 consisting of circular arcs tangent to each other. As 
the volume of air included decreases, the angles of the circular triangle 
will (theoretically) not decrease below 120®; we obtain the shapes shown 
in Figures 254-5, which again tend to straight segments as in Figure 235 
as the area tends to zero. The mathematical reason for the failure of 




Figs. 254-5. Isoperimetric figures with boundary restrictions. 


soap films to form tangent arcs is the fact that as soon as the bubble 
separates from the vertices, the connecting lines must no longer be 
counted twice. The corresponding experiments are illustrated by 
Figures 256 and 257. 

* Exercise: Study the corresponding mathematical problem: a circular triangle 
is to be found including a given area and such that its perimeter plus three seg¬ 
ments joining the vertices to the given points has a minimum length. 

A cubic frame inside of which we blow a bubble will provide surfaces 
of constant mean curvature with a quadratic base, if the bubble bulges 
out of the frame. As we remove air from the bubble by sucking through 
a straw, we obtain a sequence of beautiful structures which result in 
that of Figure 258. The phenomena of stability and transition between 



396 


MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


I VII] 


different states of equilibria are a source of experiments that are very 
illuminating from the mathematical point of view. The experiments 
illustrate the theory of stationary values, since the transitions can be 
made to take place so as to lead through an unstable equilibrium which 
is a ^‘stationary state.’’ 




For example, the cubical structure of Figure 240 exhibits asymmetry 
insofar as a vertical plane in the center connects the twelve surfaces 
issuing from the edges. Hence there must be at least two other positions 
of equilibrium, one with a vertical and one with a horizontal central 
square. As a matter of fact, by blowing through a fine tube against 
the edges of this square, one can force the structure into a position 
where the square reduces to a point, the center of the cube; this position 



SOLUTIONS OF MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS 


397 


of unstable equilibrium will immediately go into one of the other stable 
positions obtained from the original by a rotation through 90°. 

A similar experiment can be performed on the soap film that demon¬ 
strates Steiner^s problem for four points forming a square (Figs. 219-20). 

If we want to obtain the solutions of such problems as limiting cases 
of isoperimetric problems—for example, if we want to obtain Figure 240 
from Figure 258—we must suck the air out of the bubble. Now Figure 
258 is completely symmetric, and its limit for vanishing content of the 
bubble would be a symmetric system of 12 planes meeting at the center. 



Fig. 268. 


This can really be observed. But the position obtained as a limit is 
not in stable equilibrium; instead, it will change over into one of the 
positions of Figure 240. By using a somewhat more viscous liquid than 
that described above the whole phenomenon can be observed very 
easily. It exemplifies the fact that even in physical problems the solu¬ 
tion of a problem need not depend continuously on the data; for in the 
limiting case for volume zero the solution, given by Figure 240, is not 
the limit of the solution, given by Figure 258, for volume c as c tends to 
zero. 



CHAPTER VIII 

THE CALCULUS 

INTRODUCTION 

With an absurd oversimplification, the ^^invention’^ of the calculus is 
sometimes ascribed to two men, Newton and Leibniz. In reality, the 
calculus is the product of a long evolution that was neither initiated 
nor terminated by Newton and Leibniz, but in which both played a 
decisive part. Scattered over seventeenth century Europe, for the most 
part outside the schools, was a group of spirited scientists who strove 
to continue the mathematical work of Galileo and Kepler. By corre¬ 
spondence and travel these men maintained close contact. Two central 
problems held their attention. First, the problem of tangents', to deter¬ 
mine the tangent lines to a given curve, the fundamental problem of the 
differential calculus. Second, the problem of quadrature: to determine 
the area within a given curve, the fundamental problem of the integral 
calculus, Newton's and Leibniz' great merit is to have clearly recog¬ 
nized the intimate connection between these two problems. In their hands 
the new unified methods became powerful instruments of science. Much 
of the success was due to the marvelous symbolic notation invented by 
Leibniz. His achievement is in no way diminished by the fact that it 
was linked with hazy and untenable ideas which are apt to perpetuate 
a lack of precise understanding in minds that prefer mysticism to clarity. 
Newton, by far the greater scientist, appears to have been mainly in¬ 
spired by Barrow (1630-1677), his teacher and predecessor at Cambridge. 
Leibniz was more of an outsider. A brilliant lawyer, diplomat, and 
philosopher, one of the most active and versatile minds of his century, 
he learned the new mathematics in an incredibly short time from the 
physicist Huygens while visiting Paris on a diplomatic mission. Soon 
afterwards he published results that contain the nucleus of the modem 
calculus. Newton, whose discoveries had been made much earlier, was 
averse to publication. Moreover, although he had originally found 
many of the results in his masterpiece, the Principia^ by the methods 
of the calculus, he preferred a presentation in the style of classical 
geometry, and almost no trace of the calculus appears explicitly in the 

398 



INTRODUCTION 


399 


Principia. Only later were his papers on the method of ^‘fluxions'' 
published. Soon his admirers started a bitter feud over priority with 
the friends of Leibniz. They accused the latter of plagiarism, although 
in an atmosphere saturated with the elements of a new theory, nothing 
is more natural than simultaneous and independent discovery. The 
resulting quarrel over priority in the ‘‘invention’^ of the calculus set an 
unfortunate example for the overemphasis on questions of precedence 
and claims to intellectual property that is apt to poison the atmosphere 
of natural scientific contact. 

In the mathematical analysis of the seventeenth and most of the 
eighteenth centuries, the Greek ideal of clear and rigorous reasoning 
seemed to have been discarded. ‘‘Intuition^’ and ‘finstinct^' replaced 
reason in many important instances. This only encouraged an uncritical 
belief in the superhuman power of the new methods. It was generally 
thought that a clear presentation of the results of the calculus was not 
only unnecessary but impossible. Had not the new science been in the 
hands of a small group of extremely competent men, serious errors and 
even debacle might have resulted. These pioneers were guided by a 
strong instinctive feeling that kept them from going far astray. But 
when the French Revolution opened the way to an immense extension 
of higher learning, when increasingly large numbers of men wished to 
participate in scientific activity, the critical revision of the new analysis 
could no longer be postponed. This challenge was successfully met in 
the nineteenth century, and today the calculus can be taught without 
a trace of mystery and with complete rigor. There is no longer any 
reason why this basic instrument of the sciences should not be under¬ 
stood by every educated person. 

This chapter is intended to serve as an elementary introduction in 
which the emphasis is on understanding the basic concepts rather than 
on formal manipulation. Intuitive language will be used throughout, 
but always in a manner consistent with precise concepts and clear 
procedure. 


§1. THE INTEGRAL 

1. Area as a limit 

In order to calculate the area of a plane figure we choose as the unit 
of area a square whose sides are of unit length. If the unit of length is 
the inch, the corresponding unit of area will be the square inch; i.e. the 
square whose sides are of length one inch. On the basis of this definition 



400 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIII] 


it is very easy to calculate the area of a rectangle. If p and q are the 
lengths of two adjacent sides measured in terms of the unit of length, 
then the area of the rectangle is pq square units, or, briefly, the area is 
equal to the product pq. This is true for arbitrary p and g, rational 
or not. For rational p and q we obtain this result by writing p — mjn^ 
q = m'In'f with integers m, n, m', n'. Then we find the common 
measure 1/N = 1/nn' of the two edges, so that p = mn'»l/iV, q = 
nm'-l/N. Finally, we subdivide the rectangle into small squares of 
side 1/N and area l/N^. The number of such squares is nm^-mn' and 
the total area is nm'mn'-l/N^ = nm'mn'/'n/n'^ = m/n-m^/n* = pq. 
If p and q are irrational, the same result is obtained by first replacing p 
and q by approximate rational numbers Pr and qr respectively, and then 
letting Pr and qr tend to p and q. 

It is geometrically obvious that the area of a triangle is equal to half 
the area of a rectangle with the same base h and altitude h\ hence the 
area of a triangle is given by the familiar expression \bh. Any domain 
in the plane bounded by one or more polygonal lines can be decomposed 
into triangles; its area, therefore, can be obtained as the sum of the areas 
of these triangles. 

The need for a more general method of computing areas arises when 
we ask for the area of a figure bounded, not by polygons, but by curvea. 
How shall we determine, for example, the area of a circular disk or of a 
segment of a parabola? This crucial question, which is at the base of 
the integral calculus, was treated as early as the third century B.C. by 
Arch medes, who calculated such areas by a process of ‘‘exhaustion.*’ 
With Archimedes and the great mathematicians until the time of Gauss, 
we may take the “naive” attitude that curvilinear areas are intuitively 
given entities, and that the question is not to definey but to compute 
them (see, however, the discussion on p. 464). We inscribe in the 
domain an approximating domain with a polygonal boundary and a 
well defined area. By choosing another polygonal domain which in¬ 
cludes the former we obtain a better approximation to the given domain. 
Proceeding in this way, we can gradually “exhaust” the whole area, and 
we obtain the area of the given domain as the limit of the areas of a 
properly chosen sequence of inscribed polygonal domains with an in¬ 
creasing number of sides. The area of a circle of radius 1 may be com¬ 
puted in this way; its numerical value is denoted by the symbol ir. 

Archimedes carried out this general scheme for the circle and for the 
parabolic segment. During the seventeenth century many more cases 



AREA AS A LIMIT 


401 


were successfully treated. In each case, the actual calculation of the 
limit was made to depend on an ingenious device specially suited to the 
particular problem. One of the main achievements of the calculus 
was to replace these special and restricted procedures for the calculation 
of areas by a general and powerful method. 

2. The Integral 

The first basic concept of the calculus is that of integral. In this 
article we shall understand the integral as an expression of the area 
under a curve by means of a limit. If a positive continuous function 
y — /(*) is given, e.g. y = or y = 1 + cos a;, then we consider the 
domain bounded below by the segment on the z-axis from a coordinate 
a to a greater codrdinate h, on the sides by the perpendiculars to the 
z-axis at these points, and above by the curve y = /(z). Our aim is to 
calculate the area A of this domain. 



Since such a domain cannot, in general, be decomposed into rectangles 
or triangles, no immediate expression of this area A is available for 
explicit calculation. But we can find an approximate value for A, and 
thus represent A as a limit, in the following way: We subdivide the 
interval from z = a to z = 6 into a number of small subintervals, erect 
perpendiculars at each point of subdivision, and replace each strip of 
the domain under the curve by a rectangle whose height is chosen 
somewhere between the greatest and the least height of the curve in that 
strip. The sum S of the areas of these rectangles gives an approximate 
value for the actual area A under the curve. The accuracy of this ap¬ 
proximation will be better the larger the number of rectangles and the 
smaller the width of each individual rectangle. Thus we can charac¬ 
terize the exact area as a limit: If we form a sequence. 


402 


THE CALCULUS 


I VIII] 


( 1 ) 8i, St f Sz f •»• f 

of rectangular approximations to the area under the curve in such a 
manner that the width of the widest rectangle in Sn tends to 0 as n 
increases; then the sequence (1) approaches the limit Ay 

( 2 ) Sn-^Ay 

and this limit A, the area under the curve, is independent of the particu¬ 
lar way in which the sequence (1) is chosen, so long as the widths of the 
approximating rectangles tend to zero. (For example, Sn can arise 
from jSn-i by adding one or more new points of subdivision to those 
defining 5n-i i or the choice of points of subdivision for Sn can be en¬ 
tirely independent of the choice for Sn-i.) The area A of the domain, 
expressed by this limiting process, we call by definition the integral of 
the function f(x) from a b. With a special symbol, the ''integral sign,’’ 
it is written 


(3) 



dx. 


The symbol J, the "do;,” and the name "integral” were introduced 
by Leibniz in order to suggest the way in which the limit is obtained. 
To explain this notation we shall repeat in more detail the process of 
approximation to the area A. At the same time the analytic formula¬ 
tion of the limiting process will make it possible to discard the restrictive 
assumptions f(x) > 0 and 6 > a, and finally to eliminate the prior in¬ 
tuitive concept of area as the basis of our definition of integral (the latter 
will be done in the supplement, §1). 

Let us subdivide the interval from a to 6 into n small subintervals, 
which, for simplicity only, we shall assume to be of equal width, 
(6 — o)/n. We denote the points of subdivision by 


Xo = a, 


I 

xi = a H- 


n 


X2 == o -f 


2(b - a) 


n 


Xn = a -H 


n{b — a) 


n 


= b. 


We introduce for the quantity (b — a)/n, the difference between consecu¬ 
tive a:-values, the notation Ax (read, "delta x”). 


Ax 


6 — a 

—— = X,+l - Xiy 


where the symbol A means simply "difference” (it is an "operator” 
S 3 anbol, and must not be mistaken for a number.) We may choose as 



THE INTEGRAL 


403 



Fig. 260. Area approximated by small rectanglee. 


the height of each approximating rectangle the value of 2 / = f{x) at the 
right-hand endpoint of the subinterval. Then the sum of the areas 
of these rectangles will be 

(4) Sn = f(xi) • Ax + f(x 2 ) -Ax + ... d- f(Xn) • Ax, 
which is abbreviated as 

( 5 ) Sn = 

y-i 

n 

Here the symbol X) (read ‘^sigma from ; = 1 to n”) means the sum of 

j-i 

all the expressions obtained by letting j assume in turn the values 
1, 2, 3, • • • , 71. 


The use of the symbol ^ to express in concise form the result of a summation 
may be illustrated by the following examples: 


10 


2+3+4+. 


1+2+3+- 

• • + n - ^ y, 

1* + 2* + 3» + 

••• 4-n« = gi«, 

ag + + • • • 

n 

+ ag" = V aqiy 


i 


a + (fl + d) + (fli + 2d) + • • • -f- (n + wd) 



Now we form a sequence of such approximations Sn in which n in 
creases indefinitely, so that the number of terms in each sum (5) in¬ 
creases, while each single term/(xy)Ax approaches 0 because of the factor 
A X = (6 — a)/n. As n increases, this sum tends to the area A, 



404 

THE CALCULUS 

(VIII 

(6) 

n 

A = lim 2 fixj)Ax = 1 f(x) dx. 

y-i 



Leibniz symbolized this passage to the limit from the approximating 
sum Sn to A by replacing the summation sign 2^ by / and the dif¬ 
ference symbol A by the symbol d. (The summation symbol was 
usually written S in Leibniz* time, and the symbol / is merely a stylized 
S.) While Leibniz* symbolism is very suggestive of the manner in 
which the integral is obtained as the limit of a finite sum, one must be 
careful not to attach too much significance to what is, after all, a pure 
convention as to how the limit shall be denoted. In the early days of 
the calculus, when the concept of limit was not clearly understood and 
certainly not always kept in mind, one explained the meaning of the 
integral by saying that “the finite difference Ax is replaced by the in¬ 
finitely small quantity dx, and the integral itself is the sum of infinitely 
many infinitely small quantities /(x) dx.** Although the infinitely 
small has a certain attraction for speculative souls, it has no place in 
modern mathematics. No useful purpose is served by surrounding the 
clear notion of the integral with a fog of meaningless phrases. But 
even Leibniz was sometimes carried away by the suggestive power of his 
symbols; they work as if they denote a sum of “infinitely small** quanti¬ 
ties with which one can nevertheless operate to a certain extent as with 
ordinary quantities. In fact, the word integral was coined to indi¬ 
cate that the whole or integral area A is composed of the “infinitesi¬ 
mal** parts /(x) dx. At any rate, it was almost a hundred years after 
Newton and Leibniz before it was clearly recognized that the limit 
concept and nothing else is the true basis for the definition of the 
integral. By firmly staying on this basis we may avoid all the haze, 
all the difficulties, and all the nonsense so disturbing in the early de¬ 
velopment of the calculus. 

3. General Remarks on the Integral Concept. General Definition 

In our geometrical definition of the integral as an area we assumed 
explicitly that /(x) is never negative throughout the interval [a, b] of 
integration, i.e. that no portion of the graph lies below the x-axis. But 
in our analytic definition of the integral as the limit of a sequence of 
sums Sn this assumption is superfluous. We simply take the small 
quantities/(x/) • Ax, form their sum, and pass to the limit; this procedure 
remains perfectly meaningful if some or all of the values/(x,) are nega¬ 
tive. Interpreting this geometrically by means of areas (Fig. 261), we 



REMARKS ON INTEGRAL CONCEPT 


405 



Fif. 2tl. Poaitiv* and naiativa araaa. 


find the integral of f{x) to be the algebraic sum of the areas bounded by 
the graph and the x-axis, where areas lying below the a;-axis are counted 
as negative and the others positive. 

It may happen that in applications we are led to integrals J f(x)dx 

where b is less than a, so that (6 — a) fn = Ax is a negative number. 
In our analytic definition we have/(x;)* Aic negative if f{xj) is positive 
and Ax negative, etc. In other words, the value of the integral will be 
the negative of the value of the integral from & to a. Thus we have 
the simple rule 

j f{x)dx = f{x)dx. 

We must emphasize that the value of the integral remains the same 
even if we do not restrict ourselves to equidistant points x,- of sub¬ 
division, or, what is the same, to equal x-differences Ax = xy^i ~ x,-. 
We may choose the x, in other ways, so that the differences 
Azj = xy+i — Xy are not equal (and must accordingly be distinguished 
by subscripts). Even then the sums 

Sn = /(xOAXo + /(Xj)AXi + ... + /(Xn)AXn-.l 

and also the sums 

Sn == f(Xo)AXo + /(Xi)AXi + . . . + /(Xn-l)AXn~l 

will tend to the same limit, the value of the integral / /(x) dx, if only 

Ja 

care is taken that with increasing n all the differences Axy = xy+i — Xy 
tend to zero in such a way that the largest such difference for a given 
value of n approaches zero as n increases. 

Accordingly, the final definition of the integral is given by 

mb n 

f /(x) dx = lim ^ f{vj)AXj 

a 1-1 


(6a) 



406 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIllI 


as n—»00. In this limit Vj may denote any point of the interval 
Xi < Vj < Xj+i, and the only restriction for the subdivision is that the 
longest interval A*,- = a:/+i — Xf must tend to zero as n increases. 



Fig. 262. Arbitrary aubdiviaion in the general definition of integral. 

The existence of the limit (6a) does not need a proof if we take for 
granted the concept of the area under a curve and the possibility of 
approximating this area by sums of rectangles. However, as will ap¬ 
pear in a later discussion (p. 464), a closer analysis shows that it is de¬ 
sirable and even necessary for a logically complete presentation of the 
notion of integral to prove the existence of the limit for any continuous 
function/(a;) without reference to a prior geometrical concept of area, 

4. Examples of Integration. Integration of x*^ 

Until now our discussion of the integral has been merely theoretical. 
The crucial question is whether the general pattern of forming a sum Sn 
and then passing to the limit actually leads to tangible results in con¬ 
crete cases. Of course, this will require some additional reasoning 
adapted to the specific function/(a:) for which the integral is to be found. 
When Archimedes two) thousand years ago found the area of the para¬ 
bolic segment, he performed what we now call the integration of the 
function/(x) = x* by a very ingenious device; in the seventeenth century 
the forerunners of the modern calculus succeeded in solving problems of 
integration for simple functions such as x", again by special devices. 
Only after much experience with specific cases was a general approach 
to the problem of integration found in the systematic methods of the 
calculus, and thus the scope of solvable individual problems was greatly 
widened. In the present article we shall discuss a few of the instructive 
special problems belonging to the ‘‘pre-calculus'^ stage, for nothing can 
better illustrate integration as a limiting process. 

a) We start with a quite trivial example. If y = /(x) is a constant. 





EXAMPLES OF INTEGRATION 


407 


for example f{x) = 2, then obviously the integral j 2 dx, understood as 

an area, is 2(6 — a), since the area of a rectangle is equal to base times 
altitude. We shall compare this result with the definition of the in¬ 
tegral (6) as a limit: If we substitute in (6) f(xf) = 2 for all values of 
j, we find that 

<S„ = 52 = 52 2Aa: = 2 52 Ax = 2(6 — o) 

j-i >-i 1-1 

for every n, since 

n 

52 Ax = (xi — Xo) + (xj — xi) + • • • 

i-i 

+ (x„ - x„_i) = x„ - Xo = 6 — o. 

b) Almost as simple is the integration of /(x) = x. Here f x dx is 
the area of a trapezoid (Fig. 263), and this, by elementary geometry, is 

(6 - a) '-±_« = 

This result again agrees with the definition (6) of the integral, as is seen 
by an actual passage to the limit without making use of the geometrical 
figure: If we substitute/(x) = x in (5), then the sum S„ becomes 

n n 

(Sn = 52 2 :, Ax = S (a + jAx)Ax 

,-i y-i 

= (na + Ax + 2Ax + 3Ax + • • • + nAx)Ax 
= noAx + (Ax)*(l + 2 + 3 + ■ • • + n). 

Using the formula (1) on page 12- for the arithmetical series 
l + 2 + 3 + ”* + n, we have 

S. - M’. 

Since Ax= ^- - , this is equal to 

n 

Sn = 0(6 — o) -|- J (6 ~ ^ ~ 

If now we let n tend to infinity, the last term tends to zero, and we 
obtain 

lim Sn = J xdx = a(b — a) + Hb — af = i(^* “ ®*)> 



408 


THE CALCULUS 


I VIII] 


in conformity with the geometrical interpretation of the integral as an 
area. 

c) Less trivial is the integration of the function f{x) = x^, Archi¬ 
medes used geometrical methods to solve the equivalent problem of 
finding the area of a segment of the parabola y = x*. We shall proceed 
analytically on the basis of the definition (6a). To simplify the formal 
calculation we choose 0 as the “lower limit” a of the integral; then 




Fig. 268. Ar«a of a trapeaoid. 

A* = h/n. Since Xj = j-A* and/(a:/) = we obtain for S„ the 

expression 

Sn = £/0’Ax)Ax = [l*.(Ax)* + 2*. (Ax)* + ... + h*(Ax)*].Ax 

j-i 

= (1* + 2* + ... + n*)(Ax)'. 

Now we can actually calculate the limit. Using the formula 
2 * + 


2 n(n + l)(2n + 1) 
+ n = — 


6 

established on page 14, and making the substitution Ax = b/n, we 
obtain 


-S. = 


n(n + l)(2n + 1) 




This preliminary transformation makes the passage to the limit an 
easy matter, since 1/n tends to zero as n increases indefinitely. Thus 

we obtain as limit simply - .1*2= - , and thereby the result 

D 3 



EXAMPLES OF INTEGRATION 


409 


Applying this result to the area from 0 to a we have 

[ dx = aV3, 

Jo 

and by subtraction of the areas, 



Exercise: Prove in the same way, using formula (6) on page 16 that 


f 


0 ^ dx 


h* — 


By developing general formulas for the sum 1* -f 2* 4- • • * + n* of the Ath 
powers of the integers from 1 to n, one can obtain the result 

f b ^*+1 _ I 

xb dx ^ — , , — , k any positive integer, 
fc -r 1 


* Instead of proceeding in this way, we can obtain more simply an even more 
general result by utilizing our previous remark that we may calculate the integral 
by means of non-equidistant points of subdivision. We shall establish formula 
(7) not only for any positive integer k but for an arbitrary positive or negative 
rational number 


k = u/Vf 


where w is a positive integer and t; is a positive or negative integer. Only the 
value k — —1, for which formula (7) becomes meaningless, is excluded. We 
shall also suppose that 0 < a < 6. 

To obtain the integral formula (7), we form by choosing the points of sub¬ 


division Xo 


Clf Xi f Xt f • * • , Xn 


b in geometrical progression. 


We set - 




so that b/a = q^, and define Xq * a, xi =« aq^ Xi =* ac^, ... , Xn =* ag" * 6. By this 
device, as we shall see, the passage to the limit becomes very easy. For the 
‘Rectangle sum** Sn we find, since /(x,) « x, « and Ax/ — x/+i — x/ — 
aqi+i — aqf, 


Sn - a*(ag — a) -f “ «?) + a^q^(aq^ — og*) 

“h • • • 4" “• 


Since each term contains the factor a*(ag — a), we may write 
Sn - a*+>(g - 1)|1 + 4" ••• 4- 

Substituting t for we see that the expression in braces is the geometrical series 



410 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIll] 


1 + < + -f 


— 1 

+ whose sum, as shown on page 13, is :-r . But 


t - 1 




Hence 


( 8 ) 

where 


gfc+1 


N 


5*+i _ 


1 


? -1 

Thus far n has been a fixed number. Now we shall let n increase, and determine 
the limit of N. As n increases, the nth root =■ 9 will tend to 1 (see p. 323), 


and therefore both numerator and denominator of N will tend to zero, which 
makes caution necessary. Suppose first that ^ is a positive integer; then 
the division by ^ — 1 can be carried out, and we obtain (see p. 13) N « 
g* -h -f • • • -f ? + 1. If now n increases, q tends to 1 and hence g*, g*, • • • , g* 
will also tend to 1, so that N approaches fc + 1. But this shows that Sn tends to 


^+1 


, as was to be proved. 


fc + 1 

Exercise: Prove that for any rational A; 5 *^ —1 the same limit formula, N -> 
A; -f 1, and therefore the result (7), remains valid. First give the proof, according 
to our model, for negative integers k. Then, if A; == w/r, write g*^* - « and 

— 1 gul-w — 1 j,Uf* _ 


N 


«•- 1 


1 


- 1 / s* - 1 
-1 * 


If n increases, both s and g tend to 1, and therefore the two quotients on the 

U V 

right hand side tend to u -f and v respectively, which yields again-= A; + 1 


for the limit of N, 

In §6 we shall see how this lengthy and somewhat artificial discussion may be 
replaced by the simpler and more powerful methods of the calculus. 

Exercises: 1) Check the preceding integration of x* for the cases A; = J, ~li 
2, -2, 3, -3. 

2) Find the values of the integrals: 





e) 


/• 

J 0 


xdx. 


3) Find the values of the integrals: 



T^dx, 



7^ cos X dx. 



X* cos* X sin* X dx. 


d) 



tan X dx. 


(Hint: Consider the graphs of the functions under the integral sign, take into 
account their symmetry with respect to a; - 0, and interpret the integrals as areas.) 

*4) Integrate sin x and cos x from 0 to & by substituting Aa; - h and using the 
formulas of page 488. 



EXAMPLES OF INTEGRATION 


411 


6) Integrate/(x) * x and/(x) =* x* from 0 to 6 by subdividing into equal parts 
and by using in (6a) the values Vj « J(x/ -f x,+i). 

*6) Using the result (7) and the definition of the integral with equal values 
of Ax prove the limiting relation: 


1* -f 2* + -h n* 


1 

fc “I" 1 


as n 


00 . 


1 fl 

(Hint: Set “ ” 8,nd show that the limit is equal to J x* dx.) 

J^) - 2 ( v /2 - 1 ). 

71 ny 


*7) Prove for ti —> « 


w V2 -f n ^ 


(Hint: Write this sum so that its limit appears as an integral.) 

8) Calculate the area of a parabolic segment bounded by an arc P 1 P 2 and the 
chord P 1 P 2 of a parabola ?j =* ax* in terms of the coordinates Xi and X 2 of the two 
points. 


5. Rules for (he ^Integral Calculus” 

An important step in the development of the calculus was taken when 
certain general mles were formulated by means of which more involved 
problems could be reduced to simpler ones and thereby be solved by an 
almost mechanical procedure. This algorithmic feature is particularly 
emphasized by Leibniz^ notation. Still, too much concentration on the 
mechanics of problem solving can degrade the teaching of the calculus 
into an empty drill. 

Some simple rules for integrals follow at once either from the defini¬ 
tion (6) or from the geometrical interpretation of integrals as areas. 

The integral of the sum of two functions is equal to the sum of the integrals 
of the two functions. The integral of a constant c times a function f(x) 
is c times the integral of f(x). These two rules combined are expressed 
in the formula 

(9) f lcf(x) + dg(x)] dx c 

The proof follows immediately from the definition of the integral as the 
limit of the finite sum (5), since the corresponding formula for a sum 
Sn is obviously true. The rule extends immediately to sums of more 
than two functions. 

As an example of the use of this rule we consider a polynomial, 
f(x) = oo + aix + ogx* + • • • + anx", 


J fix) dx + d j g(x) dx. 



412 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIII] 


where the coefficients oo, ai ,•••, an are constants. To form the in¬ 
tegral of /(x) from a to 6, we proceed termwise, according to the rule. 
Using formula (7) we find 

/ h 1 2 2 Ln+1 __ n+1 

/(i) dx = ao(6 - a) + Oi — - -h • • • + o» ^ ^ ■ • 

Another rule, obvious both from the analytic definition and the geometric 
interpretation, is given by the formula: 

(10) J f(x) dx + f(x) dx = j f(x) dx. 

Furthermore, it is clear that the integral becomes zero if 6 is equal to a. 
The rule of page 405, 

(11) J f(x) dx = - fix) dx , 

is in agreement with the last two rules, since it corresponds to (10) for 
c = a. 

Sometimes it is convenient to use the fact that the value of the in¬ 
tegral in no way depends upon the particular name x chosen for the 
independent variable in fix) ; for example 

/ b fib fib 

fix) dx = j fiu) du = j fit) dt, etc. 

For a mere change in the name of the coordinates in the system to which 
the graph of the function refers does not alter the area under the curve. 
The same remark applies even if we make certain changes in the co¬ 
ordinate system itself. For example, let us shift the origin to the right 
by one unit from 0 to O', as in Figure 265, so that x is replaced by a 



Fis» 2M Shiftinc oC 




RULES FOR “INTEGRAL CALCULUS" 


413 


new coordinate x' such that x = 1 + x'. A curve with the equation 
y /(^) will have in the new coordinate system the equation 
2/=/(l+x'). (E.g. 2 /=: 1/x = 1/(1+ x').) A given area A under this 
curve, say between x = 1 and x = 6, is, in the new codrdinate system, 
the area under the arch between x' = 0 and x' = 6 — 1. Thus we have 



^ f(x) da: = jf /(I + xO dx', 

or, changing the 

name x' to u, 

(12) 

jf fix) dx = j /(I + w) du. 

For example, 


(12a) 

f^-dx=r\i du; 

Jl X Jo 1 + w 

and for the function /(x) = x\ 

(12b) 

J dx = J (1 + w)* du. 

Similarly, 


(12c) 

-ft -ft-i 

I x’^ dx = (1 + w)* du 

Since the left side of (12c) is equal to -, we obtain 

iC "f" i 

(12d) 

-ft-l 


Exercises: 1) Calculate the integral of 1 + x + + • • • + from 0 to b, 

2 ) For n > 0 prove that the integral of (1 -f x)** from —1 to z is equal to 

(1 4 - 

(n + 1) ' 


3) Show that the integral from 0 to 1 of x** sin x is smaller than l/(n + !)• 
(Hint: The latter value is the integral of x**). 

4) Prove directly and by use of the binomial theorem that the integral from 


— 1 to z of 


(1 4- x)". (1 + z)^+^ 
n(n -f 1) 


Finally we mention two important rules which have the form of 
inequalities. These rules permit rough, but useful, appraisals of the 
values of integrals. 



414 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


We suppose that b > a and that the values of /(i) in the interval 
nowhere exceed those of another function g(x). Then we have 


(13) 


/ f{x) dx < g{x) dx, 


as is immediately clear either from Figure 266 or from the analytic defini- 



Fig. 266. CompariBon of integrals. 


tion of the integral. In particular, if g(x) = Af is a constant not ex¬ 
ceeded by the values of/(x), we have j g(x) dx j M dx = M(b — a). 
It follows that 


(14) 


f 


fix) dx < Mil) - a). 


If fix) is not negative, then fix) = |/(x) \. If fix) < 0, then 
l/(^) I > /(^)- Hence, setting gix) — |/(x) | in (13), we obtain the 
useful formula 


(15) fix) dx < j^\ fix) 1 dx. 

Since | — fix) | = |/(x) |, we also have 

- J fix) dx <J \ fix) I dx, 


which, together with (15), 3delds the somewhat stronger inequality 
(16) I ^ fix) dx j < jf I fix) I dx. 

§2. THE DERIVATIVE 

1. The Derivative as a Slope 

While the concept of integral has its roots in antiquity, the other 
basic concept of the calculus, the derivative, was formulated only in 



DERIVATIVE AS SLOPE 


415 


the seventeenth century by Fermat and others. It was the discovery 
by Newton and Leibniz of the organic interrelation between these two 
seemingly quite diverse concepts that inaugurated an unparalleled 
development of mathematical science. 

Fermat was interested in determining the maxima and minima of a 
function y = J{x), In a graph of the function, a maximum corresponds 
to a summit higher than all other neighboring points, while a minimum 
corresponds to the bottom of a valley lower than all neighboring points. 
In Figure 191 on page 342 the point B is a maximum and the point C a 
minimum. To characterize the points of maximum and minimum 
it is natural to use the notion of tangent of a curve. We assume that 
the graph has no sharp corners or other singularities, and that at every 
point it possesses a definite direction given by a tangent line. At 
maximum or minimum points the tangent of the graph y = f(x) must 
be parallel to the x-axis, since otherwise the curve would be rising or 
falling at these points. This remark suggests the idea of considering 
quite generally, at any point P of the graph y = /(x), the direction of 
the tangent to the curve. 

To characterize the direction of a straight line in the x, y-plane it 
is customary to give its slopey which is the trigonometrical tangent of 
the angle a from the direction of the positive x-axis to the line. If P 
is any point of the line L, we proceed to the right to a point R and then 

RO 

up or down to the point Q on the line; then slope of L = tan a = ^. 

PR 

The length PR is taken as positive, while RQ is taken as positive or nega¬ 
tive according as the direction from B to Q is up or down, so that the 
slope gives the rise or fall per unit length along the horizontal when we 
proceed along the line from left to right. In Figure 267 the slope of 
the first line is while the slope of the second line is —1. 




Fif. 207. Slopes of lines. 



416 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIIIl 


By the slope of a curve at a point P we mean the slope of the tangent 
to the curve at P. As long as we accept the tangent of a curve as an 
intuitively given mathematical concept there remains only the problem 
of finding a procedure for calculating the elope. For the moment we shall 
accept this point of view, postponing to the supplement a closer analysis 
of the problems involved. 

2 . The Derivatiye as a Limit 

The slope of a curve y = f(x) at the point P (x, y) cannot be calculated 
by referring to the curve at the point P alone. Instead, one must 
resort to a limiting process much like that involved in the calculation 
of the area under a curve. This limiting process is the basis of the 
differential calculus. We consider on the curve another point Pi, 
near P, with coordinates xi , yi. The straight line joining P to Pi 



we call ti ; it is a secant of the curve, which approximates to the tan¬ 
gent at P when Pi is near P. The angle from the x-axis to h we call ai . 
Now if we let Xi approach a:, then Pi will move along the curve toward 
P, and the secant ti will approach as a limiting position the tangent t 
to the curve at P. If a denotes the angle from the x-axis to then, as 
xi a;,t 

yi y. Pi —> P, ti t, and a\ —► a. 

t Our notation here is slightly different from that in Chapter VI inasmuch 
as there we have xi, the latter value being fixed. No confusion should 
arise from this interchange of symbols. 



DERIVATIVE AS LIMIT 


417 


The tangent is the limit of the secant^ and the slope of the tangent is the 
limit of the slope of the secant. 

Although we have no explicit expression for the slope of the tangent 
t itself, the slope of the secant ti is given by the formula 


slope of ti 


yi - y _ fjxi) - fix) 

Xi — X Xi — X 


or, if we again denote the operation of forming a difference by the 
symbol A, 


slope of . 

Ax Ax 


The slope of the secant h is a ‘^difference quotient’'—the difference Ay 
of the function values, divided by the difference Ax of the values of the 
independent variable. Moreover, 

slope of i = limit of slope of h = lim*^^^^^^-= lim^, 

Xi — X Ax 

where the limits are evaluated as a:i —► x, i.e. as Aa; = a:i — x 0. The 
slope of the tangent t to the curve is the limit of the difference quotient 
Ay/Ax as Ax = Xi — X approaches zero. 

The original function f(x) gave the height of the curve y = f{x) for 
the value x. We may now consider the slope of the curve for a variable 
point P with the coordinates x and y [= f(x)] as a new function of x 
which we denote by /'(x) and call the derivative of the function /(x). 
The limiting process by which it is obtained is called differentiation of 
f(x). This process is an operation which attaches to a given function 
t(x) another function /'(x) according to a definite rule, just as the func¬ 
tion/(x) is •defined by a rule which attaches to any value of the variable 
X the value /(x): 


/(x) = height of curve y = /(x) at the point x, 

/'(x) = slope of curve y = /(x) at the point x. 

The word “differentiation" comes from the fact that/'(x) is the limit of 
the difference/(xi) — f(x) divided by the difference Xi — x: 

(1) /'(x) = lim*^^^^^^-as Xi-^x. 

Xi — X 


Another notation, often useful, is 


fix) = Dfix), 



418 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIII j 


the simply abbreviating ''derivative of’*; still different is Leibniz’ 
notation for the derivative of y = /(x), 


dx 


or 


d/(x) 
dx ’ 


which we shall discuss in §4 and which indicates the character of the 
derivative as limit of the difference quotient Ay/Ax or Af(x)/Ax. 

If we describe the curve y = /(x) in the direction of increasing values 
of X, then a positive derivative^ /'(x) > 0, at a point means ascending curve 
(increasing values of y), a negative derivativey /'(x) < 0, means descending 
curve, while /'(x) = 0 means a horizontal direction of the curve for the 
value X. At a maximum or minimum, the slope must be zero (Fig. 269). 



Hence, by solving the equation 

m = 0 

for X we may find the positions of the maxima and minima, as was 
first done by Fermat. 

3. Examples 

The considerations leading to the definition (1) might seem to be 
without practical value. One problem has been replaced by another: 
instead of being asked to find the slope of the tangent to a curve y = /(x) 
at a point, we are asked to evaluate a limit, (1), which at first sight 
appears equally difficult. But as soon as we leave the domain of gen¬ 
eralities and consider specific functions /(x) we shall obtain tangible 
results. 

The simplest such function is /(x) = c, where c is a constant. The 
graph of the function y = /(x) = c is a horizontal line coinciding with 
all its tangents, and it is obvious that 

nx) = 0 


EXAMPLES 


419 


for all values of x. This also follows from the definition (1), for 

^ ^ /(a^i) - fix) ^ c - c ^ 0 _ Q 

Ax Xi — X Xi — X Xi — X ’ 

so that, trivially, 


Xi — X 


as Xi 


X. 


Next we consider the simple function y = /(x) = x, whose graph is 
a straight line through the origin bisecting the first quadrant. Geomet¬ 
rically it is clear that 

nx) = 1 


for all values of x, and the analytic definition (1) again yields 
Kx\) - fix) Xi - X 


so that 


Xi — X Xi — X 

lim 


- 1 , 


Xi — X 


= 1 as Xi • 


' X. 


The simplest non-trivial example is the differentiation of the function 

y = /(*) = 

which amounts to finding the slope of a parabola. This is the simplest 
case that teaches us how to carry out the passage to the limit when the 
result is not obvious from the outset. We have 

Aj/ _ f{xi) - Six) _ - x^ 

Ax Xi — X Xi — X * 

If we should try to pass to the limit directly in numerator and de¬ 
nominator we should obtain the meaningless expression 0/0. But we can 
avoid this impasse by rewriting the difference quotient and cancelling, 
before 'passing to the limits the disturbing factor Xi — x. (In evaluating 
the limit of the difference quotient we consider only values Xi 9 ^ x, so 
that this is permissible; see p. 307.) Thus we obtain the expression: 

xl - I* (xi - x){xi + x) „ L _ 

- = - = Xl + X. 

Xl — X Xl — X 

Now, after the cancellation, there is no longer any difficulty with the 
limit as Xl —> X. The limit is obtained “by substitution^’; for the new 



420 


THE CALCULUS 


I VIII1 


form Xi + X of the difference quotient is continuous and the limit of 
a continuous function as xi x is simply the value of the function for 
Xi = X, in our case x + x =* 2x, so that 

f(x) = 2x for /(x) = X*. 

In a similar way we can prove that for/(x) = x* we have/'(x) = 3x*. 
For the difference quotient, 

Ay _ f(xi) - fix) ^ xi - x^ 

Ax xi — X xi — X ^ 

can be simplified by the formula xj — x* = (xi — x)(x? + xix + x*); 
the denominator Ax = xi — x cancels out, and we obtain the continuous 
expression 

^ = Xi + XiX + x\ 

Ax 

Now if we let Xi approach x, this expression simply approaches 
X* + X* + x^ and we obtain as limit/'(x) = 3x*. 

In general, for 

fix) = 

where n is any positive integer, we obtain the derivative 

fix) = nx^-\ 

Exercise: Prove this result. (Use the algebraic formula 
xJ — « (xi — x)(xj“i + xlf“*x 4- -!-•••+ 

As a further example of simple devices that permit explicit determina¬ 
tion of the derivative we consider the function 

y = fix) = 

We have 

^ ^ yi — y _ _ ly 1 ^ X - xi 1 

Ax Xi — X \Xi X/ Xi — X XiX Xi — X* 

Again we may cancel, and we find ^ a — — , which is continuous at 

Ax XiX 

Xi ss x; hence we have in the limit 

/-w - -i. 



EXAMPLES 


421 


Of course, neither the derivative nor the function itself is defined for 
a: = 0. 

1 2 

Exercises: Prove in a similar manner that for f{x) =» —, /'(a;) ■■ —for 

X* X* 

f{x) » “ (1 + x)»,/'(x) » n(l + x)»-». 

We shall now carry out the differentiation of 

y = fix) == VS- 

For the difference quotient we obtain 

yi — y _ y/x\ — \/x 

Xi — X Xi — X 

By the formula Xi — x = (V^i ““ \/5)(\/Si + \/x) we can cancel 
a factor and get the continuous expression 

yi — y ^ 1 

Xi — X -y /xi + \/ X 

Passing to the limit yields 



Exercises: Prove that for /(x) = — 7 ^, f(x) = — 

Vx 

f'(x) = — 3 ^;for/(x) « \/l - x*,/'(x) » ■ . .Jf:.--- .for/(x) - x,/'(x) - 

3V^a;* V 1 - X* 

1 

n'V^x*»"‘ * 

4. Derivatives of Trigonometrical Functions 

We now treat the very important question of the differentiation of 
trigonometrical functions. Here radian measure of angles will be used 
exclusively. 

To differentiate the function y = f{x) = sin x we set Xi — x = A, 
so that xi = X + A and /(xi) = sin Xi = sin (x + A). By the trigono¬ 
metrical formula for sin (A + B), 

fixi) = sin (x + A) = sin x cos A + cos x sin A. 

Hence 


2(Vi)'’ 


for /(x) 


f(xi) — f(x) _ sin (a: + ft) — sin x 
xi — X ~ h 

( sin h\ 

~h~ ) 


+ sin X 



(2) 



422 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIIIl 


If now we let xi tend to x, then h tends to 0, sin h to 0, and cos A to 1, 
Moreover, by the results of page 308, 

sin h - 
lim = 1 
n 

and 

cosA—1 ^ 

lim - r - = 0. 

h 

Hence the right side of (2) approaches cos x, giving the result: 

The function f(x) = sin x has the derivative f'(x) = cos x, or briefly, 

D sin x = cos X. 

Exercise: Prove that D cos x ■» —sin x. 


To differentiate the function f(x) = tan x^ we write tan x 
and obtain 


sin x 
cos X* 


f ix + A) — fi x) _ /si n jx + h) ^ sin x \ 1 
h \cos (x + M cos X/ h 

_ sin (x + ti) cosx — cos (x + h) sin x_1_ 

"" h cos (x + h) cos X 

_ sin h 1 

h cos X + h) cos X* 


(The last equality follows from the formula sin iA — B) = sin A cos B — 
cos A sin B, with A - x + h and B = A.) If now we let h approach 

zero, approaches 1, cos (x + h) approaches cos x, and we infer: 


The derivative of the function f(x) = tan x ie f'(x) = 


1 


COS^ X 


, or 


D tan X = —r— . 

cos* X 

Exercise: Prove that D cot x « — . 

sin* X 


*5. Differentiation and Continuity 

The diferentiability of a function impliee its continuity. For, if the 
limit of Ay/Ax exists as Ax tends to zero, then it is easy to see that the 
change Ay of the function fix) must become arbitrarily small as the 
difference Ax tends to zero. Hence whenever we can differentiate a 
function, its continuity is automatically assured; we shall therefore dis- 



DIFFERENTIATION AND CONTINUITY 


423 


pense with explicitly mentioning or proving the continuity of the differ¬ 
entiable functions occurring in this chapter unless there is a particular 
reason for it. 

6. Derivative and Velocity. Second Derivative and Acceleration 

The preceding discussion of the derivative was carried out in connec¬ 
tion with the geometrical concept of the graph of a function. But the 
significance of the derivative concept is by no means limited to the 
problem of finding the slope of the tangent to a curve. Even more im¬ 
portant in the natural sciences is the problem of calculating the rate of 
change of some quantity f{t) which varies with the time L It was from 
this angle that Newton made his approach to the differential calculus. 
Newton wished in particular to analyze the phenomenon of velocity, 
where the time and the position of a moving particle are considered as 
the variable elements, or, as Newton expressed it, as the ‘^fluent 
quantities.'^ 

If a particle moves along a straight line, the x-axis, its motion is 
completely described by giving the position x at any time t as a function 
X = /(/). A ‘^uniform motion" with constant velocity h along the x-axis 
is defined by a linear function x = a + 6^, where a is the coordinate 
of the particle at the time t = 0. 

In a plane the motion of a particle is described by two functions, 

X = fit), y = g{t), 

characterizing the two coordinates as functions of the time. In par¬ 
ticular, a uniform motion corresponds to a pair of linear functions, 

X == a + hty y = c + 

where b and d are the two ‘‘components" of the constant velocity, and 
a and c the coordinates of the particle at the moment < = 0; the path of 
the particle is a straight line with the equation (x — a)d — (y — c)b = 0, 
obtained by eliminating the time t from the two relations above. 

If a particle moves in the vertical x, y-plane under the influence of 
gravity alone, then, as shown in elementary physics, the motion is de¬ 
scribed by two equations, 

X = a + bt, y = c + dt — 

where a, 6, c, d are constants depending on the initial state of the particle 
and g the acceleration due to gravity, approximately equal to 32 if time 



424 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII] 


is measured in seconds and distance in feet. The trajectoiy of the 
particle, obtained by eliminating t from the two equations, is now a 
parabola, 

yc + ^ix-a) - > 

if b 0; otherwise it is a part of the vertical axis. 

If a particle is confined to move along a given curve in the plane 
(like a train along a track), then its motion may be described by giving 
the arc length s, measured along the curve from a fixed initial point Po 
to the position P of the particle at the time as a function of t; s = /(<). 
For example, on the unit circle rr* + 2 /^ = 1 the function s = ct describes 
a uniform rotation with the velocity c along the circle. 


Exercises: *Draw the trajectories of the plane motion described by 
1) a; — sin y ^ cos t, 2 ) a? = sin 2 ^, y ■= sin 3^ 3) x — sin 2tf y — 2 sin 3t. 
4) In the parabolic motion described above, suppose the particle at the origin 
for i — 0, and 6 > 0, d > 0. Find the codrdinates of the highest point of the 
trajectory. Find the time t and the value of x for the second intersection of the 
trajectory with the x-axis. 

Newton’s first aim was to determine the velocity of a non-uniform 
motion. For simplicity let us consider the motion of a particle along a 
straight line given by a function x = f(t). If the motion were uniform, 
with constant velocity, then the velocity could be found by taking two 
values t and h of the time, with corresponding values z = f(t) and 
= f(ti) of the position, and forming the quotient 


V = velocity = 


distance 

time 


Xi-X _ /(tl) - fit) 
tl-t tl-t 


For example, if t is measured in hours and x in miles, then, for ti — t= 1, 
Xi — X will be the number of miles covered in 1 hour and v will be the 
velocity in miles per hour. The statement that the velocity of the 
motion is constant simply means that the difference quotient 

(3) Ah) -f(t) 

ti — t 


is the same for all values of i and h • But when the motion is not uni¬ 
form, as in the case of a freely falling body whose .velocity increases as 
it falls, then the quotient (3) does not give the velocity at the instant t, 
but merely the average vdocity during the time interval from < to h • 



DERIVATIVE AND VELOCITY 


42£r 


To obtain the velocity at the exact instant t we must take the limit of 
the average velocity as t\ approaches L Thus we define with Newton 

(4) velocity at the instant t = lim ——— ^ = /'(O* 

t\ — t 

In other words, the velocity is the derivative of the distance coordinate 
with respect to the time, or the ‘'instantaneous rate of change'' of the 
distance with respect to the time (as distinguished from the average rate 
of change given by (3)). 

The rate of chuige of the velocity itself is called the acceleration. It is 
simply the derivative of the derivative, usually denoted by /"(O, and 
called the second derivative of f{t). 

It was observed by Galileo that for a freely falling body the vertical 
distance x through which the body falls during the time t is given by the 
formula 

(5) X = m = hgt\ 

where g is the gravitational constant. It follows by differentiating (5) 
that the velocity v of the body at the time t is given by 

(6) V = f'(t) = gt, 
and the acceleration a by 

« = /"(O = g, 

which is constant. 

Suppose it is required to find the velocity of the body 2 seconds after it 
has been released. The average velocity during the time interval from 
< = 2 to < = 2.1 is 

. 1^) . 65.6 (feet per .ecoud). 

But substituting t = 2 in (6) we find the instantaneous velocity at the 
end of two seconds to be t; = 64. 

Exercise: What is the average velocity of the body during the time interval 
from i ^ 2iot ^ 2.01? from < =* 2 to f =» 2.001? 

For motion in the plane the-two derivatives/'(<) and g\t) of the func¬ 
tions z — f{t) and y = g(t) define the components of the velocity. For 
motion along a fixed curve the velocity will be defined by the derivative 
of the function a « f(t), where s is the arc length. 



426 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII 1 


7. Geometrical Meaning of the Second Derivative 

The second derivative is also important in analysis and geometry, for 
expressing the rate of change of the slope f'(x) of the curve 
y = /(®)» gives an indication of the way the curve is bent. If f\x) is 
positive in an interval then the rate of change of /'(x) is positive. A 
positive rate of change of a function means that the values of the func¬ 
tion increase as x increases. Therefore /"(x) > 0 means that the slope 
/'(x) increases as x increases, so that the curve becomes steeper where it 
has a positive slope and less steep where it has a negative slope. We 
say that the curve is concave upward (Fig. 270). 




Similarly, if /"(x) < 0, the curve y = /(x) is concave downward 
(Fig. 271). 

The parabola y = /(x) = x* is concave upward everywhere because 
/"(x) = 2 is always positive. The curve y = /(x) = x® is concave 
upward for x > 0 and concave downward for x <0 (Fig. 153) because 
/"(x) = 6x, as the reader can easily prove. Incidentally, for x = 0 
we have /'(x) = 3x* = 0 (but no maximum or minimum!); also 
/"(x) = 0 for X = 0. This point is called a point of inflection. At such 
a point the tangent, in this case the x-axis, crosses the curve. 

If 8 denotes the arc-length along the curve, and a the slope-angle, 
then a = h{8) will be a function of 8, As we travel along the curve 
a = A(s) will change. The rate of change A'(s) is called the curvature 
of the curve at the point where the arc length is s. We mention without 
proof that the curvature k can be expressed in terms of the first and 
second derivatives of the function y = /(x) defining the curve: 

<c=r(a:)/(l + (/'(*))r*. 

8. Maxima and Minima 

We can find the maxima and minima of a given function fix) by first 
forming/'(z), then finding the values for which this derivative vanishes, 



MAXIMA AND MINIMA 


427 


and finally investigating which of these values furnish maxima and 
which minima. The latter question can be decided if we form the second 
derivative, whose sign indicates the convex or concave shape of 

the graph and whose vanishing usually indicates a point of inflection 
at which no extremum occurs. By observing the signs of f'{x) and fix) 
we can not only determine the extrema but also find the shape of the 
graph of the function. This method gives us the values of x for which 
extrema occur; to find the corresponding values of y = f(x) itself we 
have to substitute these values of x \ikf{x). 

As an example we consider the polynomial 

fix) = 2x* — 9a:* + 12x + 1, 

and obtain 

/'(a:) = 6a:* - 18a: + 12, /"(a:) = 12i - 18. 

The roots of the quadratic equation /'(i) = 0 are a:i = 1, x* = 2, and 
we have/"(xi) = — 6 < 0,/"(xj) = 6 > 0. Hence /(x) has a maximum, 
f(xi) = 6, and a minimum, /(x*) = 5. 

Exercises: 1) Sketch the graph of the function considered above. 

2 ) Discuss and sketch the graph of f{x) = (x* ~ l)(x* — 4). 

8 ) Find the minimum of x + 1 /x, of x -f o*/x, of px -f- 7 /x, where p and q are 
positive. Have these functions maxima? 

4) Find the maxima and minima of sin x and sin (x*). 

§3. THE TECHNIQUE OF DIFFERENTIATION 

Until now our efforts have been devoted to differentiating a variety 
of specific functions by transforming the difference quotients in prepara¬ 
tion for passage to the limit. It was a decisive step when, through the 
work of Leibniz, Newton, and their successors, these individual devices 
were replaced by powerful general methods. By these methods one can 
differentiate almost automatically any function that normally occurs in 
mathematics, provided one has mastered a few simple rules and can 
recognize their applicability. Thus differentiation has acquired the 
character of an “algorithm” of calculation, and it is this aspect of the 
theory that is expressed by the term “calculus.” 

We cannot go far into the details of this technique. Only a few 
simple rules will be mentioned. 

(a) Differentiation of a sum. If a and b are constants and the func¬ 
tion k{x) is given by 


k(x) = af(x) + bg(x)f 



428 


THE CALCULUS 


I VIII] 


then, as the reader can easily verify, 

k'(x) = af'(x) + bg\x). 

A similar rule holds for any number of terms. 

(b) Differentiation of a 'product. For a product, 

p{x) = f(x)g(x), 

the derivative is 

p'(x) = fix)g'(x) + g(x)r{x). 

This is easily proved by the following device: we write, adding and sub¬ 
tracting the same term, 

p(x + h) - p(x) = f(x + h)g(x + h) - f{x)g{x) 

= /(a: -t- h)g{x + h) - f(x + h)g(x) + f(x + h)g{x) - f{x)g{x), 
and obtain, by combining the first two and the second two terms, 

p(i + h) - p(x) ^ g{x + h) - g{x) /( x + h) - f(x) 

h h h 

Now we let h approach zero; since/(x + h) approaches/(x), the state¬ 
ment to be proved follows immediately. 

Exercise: Prove that the function p(x) - x^ has the derivative p'(x) =* 

(Hint: Write x^ * x and use mathematical induction.) 

Using rules (a) and (b) we can differentiate any polynomial 
/(x) = oo + aix + ... + Onx”; 

the derivative is 

f\x) = 01"}” 2 O 3 X “I" SOsX* “]"•••“}“ UCinX^ \ 

As an application we may prove the binomial theorem (compare p. 
17. This theorem concerns the expansion of (1 + x)” as a polynomial: 

(1) ;(X) = (1 + = 1 + OiX + a2X* + OsX® + . . . + OnX", 

and states that the coefficient a* is given by the formula 

(o\ ^ _ n(n - 1) ... (n - fc + 1) 

(2) o*--. 

Of course, On = 1. 

We have seen (Exercise, p. 421) that the left side of (1) differentiated 
yields n(l + x)"’‘\ Thus by the preceding paragraph we obtain 

(3) w(l + x)** * = Oi + 2aix "1” 3asX^ -}"••• + nanX^~^. 



TECHNIQUE OF DIFFERENTIATION 


429 


In this formula we now set a: = 0 and find that n = Oi, which is (2) 
for A = 1. Then we differentiate (3) again, obtaining 

n(n — 1)(1 “b S')** * “ 2<ij -j- 3'2a3Z ■!■••• d- n{j\, — l)ona;'* *. 

Substituting x = 0, we find n(n — 1) = 2o» in agreement with (2) for 
k = 2 . 


Exercise: Prove (2) for fc = 3, 4, and for general k by mathematical induction 
(c) Differentiation of a quotient. If 


then 


q(x) = 


gi^y 


q'ix) = 


g(x)f'(x) - f{x)g'(x) 


(9ix)Y 

The proof is left as an exercise. (Of course, we must assume g(x) 9 ^ 0.) 


Exercise: Derive by this rule the formulas of page 422 for the derivatives of 
tan X and cot x from those for sin x and cos x. Prove that the derivatives of 
Bee X ^ 1/cos X and cosec x = 1/sin x are sin x/cos* x and —cos x/sin* x respec¬ 
tively. 


We are now able to differentiate any function that can be written as 
the quotient of two polynomials. For example, 

1 — X 


Kx) = 


1 + X 


has the derivative 


_-d+ ^)-a -a:) _ 2 

^ ’ (1 + xy (1 + *)’• 


Exercise: Differentiate 

/(*) - 

where m is a positive integer. The result is 

f\x) — — 


(d) Differentiation of inverse functions. If 

y = /(x) and x = g{y) 

are inverse functions (e.g. y — and x == \/y), then their derivatives 
are reciprocal: 

?'(!/) or Dg{y)-Df{x) = h 



430 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


This fact is easily proved by going back to the reciprocal difference 

quotients ^ and ^ respectively; it can also be seen from the geo- 
Ax Ay 

metrical interpretation of the inverse function given on page 281, if 
we refer the slope of the tangent to the y-axis instead of to the a:-axis. 
As an example we differentiate the function 

1 

y = fix) = = X*" 

inverse to a; = y"*. (See also the more direct treatment for m = i on 
p. 421.) Since the latter function has as its derivative the expression 
we have 


rix) 


my^ 


I y 1 - 

- = -yy 

my^ m 


L 1 

whence, after substituting y = and y~-^ = /' (x) = - x”* , or 


m 


D{x^n = - X' 


1 z-i 


m 


As a further example we differentiate the inverse trigonometric function 
(see page 281): 

y = arc tan x, which means the same as x = tan y. 

Here the variable y, denoting the radian measure, is restricted to the 
interval — §ir < y < so as to insure a unique definition of the inverse 
function. 

Since we have (see page 422) D tan y = 1/cos^ y and since 1/cos* y = 
(sin* y + cos* y)/cos* y = 1 + tan* y = 1 + x*, we find: 


D arc tan x = 


1 + ^2* 

In the same way the reader may derive the following formulas: 

1 


D arc cot X = — 
D arc sin X = 


1 + X2 
1 


Vi - 


D arc cos x = — 




Finally, we come to the important rule for 
(e) DiferenUaUon of compound functions. Such functions are com- 




TECHNIQUE OF DIFFERENTIATION 


431 


pounded from two (or more) simpler ones (see p. 282). For example, 
z = sin (Vi) is compounded from 2 = sin y and y = Vi; the function 
z = V^ + Vi* is compounded from z ^ y + and y = Vi; ^ = 



Fif. 272 Fig. 273 


sin (a;*) is a compound of z = sin y and y = x*; z = 


sin - is a compound 

X 


of z = sin 2 / and y = 


1 

X* 


If two functions 


* = Qiy) Slid y ~ /(«) 

are given, and if the latter function is substituted in the former, we 
obtain the compound function 

Z = k{x) = glf(.x)i 

We assert that 

(4) k'(x) = gWix). 

For if we write 

kjxi) - kj x) ^ zi — z yi — y 
xi — X yi — y xi — x’ 

where yi = f(xi) and zi = g(yi) = k{xi), and then let xi approach x, 
the left side approaches k'ix) and the two factors on the right hand 
side approach g'(y) and f'(x) respectively, thus proving (4). 

In this proof the condition yi — y ^0 was necessary. For we divided 
by ^y = yi — y, and we cannot use values xi for which yi — y = 0. 
But the formula (4) remains valid even if = 0 in an interval around x; 
y is then constant, /'(*) = 0, k{x) = g(y) is constant with respect to x 
(since y does not c^nge with x), and hence k'(x) = 0, as (4) states in 
this case. 


432 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


The reader should verify the following examples: 

k{x) = sin \/x, k'(x) = (cos \/5) — 

2v* 

k{x) = \/x + V**. *'(*) = (1 + 5**) — 

2v® 

fc(*) = sin (*’), k'{x) = cos (x*)*2a:, 


]k(x) = \/l ““ = 


fc(a5) = sin -, 

X 


-1 


-^2x = 


—a: 


2\/l “ ic' Vl - 

Exercise: Combining the results of pages 420 and 430, show that the function 

/(x) - 


has the derivative 


/'(») - 

m 


It should be noted that all our formulas concerning powers of x can 
now be combined into a single one: 

If r is any 'positive or negative rational number^ then the function 

fi^) == . 

has the derivative 


f(x) — 

Exercises: 1) Carry out the differentiations of the exercises on page 421 by 
using the rules of this section. 

2) Differentiate the following functions: x sin x. ^ --sin nx. (x* — 3x* — 

1 -f X* 

1 1 I - 1 I ^ ^ j —. -, 

X + 1)*, 1 -f sin* X, X* sin “, arc sin (cos nx), tan ;-, arc tan ;-, v 1 — 

X* 1 — X 1 — X 


1 

l + x»* 


3) Find the second derivatives of some of the preceding functions and of 
1 — X 

—j—, arc tan x, sin* x, tan x. 

1 + X 

4) Differentiate Ci(x — xi)* -|- Vi + Ci(x — X|)* -f y\, *and prove the minimum 
properties of the light ray by reflection and by refraction stated in Chapter 
VII, pp. 330 and 382. The reflection or refraction is to be in the x-axis, and the 
coordinates of the endooints of the path may be Xi, yi and xi, yt respectively. 



TECHNIQUE OF DIFFERENTIATION 


433 


(Remark: The function possessee only one point with vanishing derivative; 
therefore, since a minimum but obviously no maximum occurs, there is no need 
to study the second derivative.) 

More Problems on Maxima and Minima: 6) Find the extrema of the following 
functions, sketch their graphs, determine the intervals of increase, decrease, 
convexity, and concavity: 

X* - 6a; + 2, x/(l + x*), xV(l + cos* x. 

6) Study the maxima and minima of the function x* -h 3ax -f- 1 in their de¬ 
pendence on a. 

7) Which point of the hyperbola 2y* — x* = 2 is nearest to the point x =» 0, 
1/ - 3? 

8) Of all rectangles with given area find the one with the shortest diagonal. 

9) Inscribe the rectangle of greatest area in the ellipse x*/a* -h |/*/6* — 1. 

10) Of all circular cylinders with given volume find the one with the least 
area. 

§4. LEIBNIZ^ NOTATION AND THE ^TNFINITELY SMALL'' 

Newton and Leibniz knew how to obtain the integral and the deriva¬ 
tive as limits. But the very foundations of the calculus were long 
obscured by an unwillingness to recognize the exclusive right of the 
limit concept as the source of the new methods. Neither Newton nor 
Leibniz could bring himself to such a clear-cut attitude, simple as it 
appears to us now that the limit concept has been completely clarified. 
Their example dominated more than a century of mathematical develop¬ 
ment during which the subject was shrouded by talk of *‘infinitely small 
quantities," “differentials," “ultimate ratios," etc. The reluctance with 
which these concepts were finally abandoned was deeply rooted in the 
philosophical attitude of the time and in the very nature of the human 
mind. One might have argued: “Of course integral and derivative can 
be and are calculated as limits. But what, after all, are these objects 
in themselves, irrespective of the particular way they are described by 
limiting processes? It seems obvious that intuitive concepts such as 
area or slope of a curve have an absolute meaning in themselves without 
any need for the auxiliary concepts of inscribed polygons or secants and 
their limits." Indeed, it is psychologically natural to search for ade¬ 
quate definitions of area and slope as “things in themselves." But to 
renounce this desire and rather to see in limiting processes their only 
scientifically relevant definitions, is in line with the mature attitude 
that has so often cleared the way for progress. In the seventeenth 
century there was no intellectual tradition to permit such philosophical 
radicalism. 



434 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIIIJ 


Leibniz^ attempt to ‘‘explain” the derivative started in a perfectly 
correct way with the difference quotient of a function y =» /(x), 

^ ^ /(xi) - Six) 

Ax Xi — X 

For the limit, the derivative, which we called /'(x) (following the usage 
introduced later by Lagrange), Leibniz wrote 

dx^ 

replacing the difference symbol A by the “differential symbol” d. Pro¬ 
vided we understand that this symbol is solely an indication that the 
limiting process Ax 0 and consequently Ay —> 0 is to be carried out, 
there is no difficulty and no mystery. Before passing to the limit, the 
denominator Ax in the quotient Ay/Ax is cancelled out or transformed 
in such a way that the limiting process can be completed smoothly. 
This is always the crucial point in the actual process of differentiation. 
Had we tried to pass to the limit without such a previous reduction, we 
should have obtained the meaningless relation Ay/Ax = 0/0, in which 
we are not at all interested. Mystery and confusion only enter if we 
follow Leibniz and many of his successors by saying something like this: 

“Ax does not approach zero. Instead, the ‘last value' of Ax is not 
zero but an ‘infinitely small quantity,' a ‘differential' called dx; and 
similarly Ay has a ‘last' infinitely small value dy. The actual quotient 
of these infinitely small differentials is again an ordinary number, 
f'(x) = dy/dx.” Leibniz accordingly called the derivative the ^^differential 
quotient^ Such infinitely small quantities were considered a new kind 
of number, not zero but smaller than any positive number of the real 
number system. Only those with a real mathematical sense could 
grasp this concept, and the calculus was thought to be genuinely diffi¬ 
cult because not everybody has, or can develop, this sense. In the same 
way, the integral was considered to be a sum of infinitely many 
“infinitely small quantities” /(x) dx. Such a sum, people seemed to 
feel, is the integral or area, while the calculation of its value as the limit 
of a finite sum of ordinary numbers fixf)^ was regarded as something 
accessory. Today we simply discard the desire for a “direct” explana¬ 
tion and define the integral as the limit of a finite sum. In this way the 
difficulties are dispelled and everything of value in the calculus is secured 
on a sound basis. 

In spite of this later development Leibniz' notation, dy/dx for /'(x) 
and / /(x) dx for the integral, was retained and has proved extremely 



LEIBNIZ' NOTATION 


435 


useful. There is no harm in it if we consider the symbols d only as 
symbols for a passage to the limit. Leibniz' notation has the advantage 
that limits of quotients and sums can in some ways be handled ‘^as if" 
they were actual quotients or sums. The suggestive power of this 
symbolism has always tempted people to impute to these symbols some 
entirely unmathematical meaning. If we resist this temptation, then 
Leibniz' notation is at least an excellent abbreviation for the more 
cumbersome explicit notation of the limit process; as a matter of fact, 
it is almost indispensable in the more advanced parts of the theory. 

For example, rule (d) of page 429 for differentiating the inverse func¬ 
tion z = g{y) oty — f(z) was that g'(y)f(z) = 1. In Leibniz' notation 
it reads simply 

dx dy ^ 
dydx ' 

"as if" the "differentials" may be cancelled out from something like an 
ordinary fraction. Likewise, rule (e) of page 431 for differentiating a 
compound function z = k{x)^ where 

2 = 9{y), y = /(*). 

now reads 

dx dy dx* 

Leibniz' notation has the further advantage of emphasizing the 
quantities x, y, z rather than their explicit functional connection. The 
latter expresses a procedure, an operation producing one quantity y from 
another x, e.g. the function y = /(x) = x* produces a quantity y equal 
to the square of the quantity x. The operation (squaring) is the object 
of the mathematician's attention. But physicists and engineers are on 
the whole primarily interested in the quantities themselves. Hence the 
emphasis on quantities in Leibniz' notation has a particular appeal to 
people engaged in applied mathematics. 

Another remark may be added. While "differentials" as infinitely 
small quantities are now definitely and dishonorably discarded, the 
same word "differential" has slipped in again through the back door— 
this time to denote a perfectly legitimate and useful concept. It now 
means simply a difference Ax when Ax is small in relation to the other 
quantities occurring. We cannot here go into a discussion of the value 
of this concept for approximate calculations. Nor can we discuss other 
legitimate mathematical notions for which the name "differential" has 



436 


THE CALCULUS 


(VIII J 


been adopted, some of which have proved quite useful in the calculus 
and in its applications to geometry. 

§5. THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM OF THE CALCULUS 

1. The Fundamental Theorem 

The notion of integration, and to some extent that of differentiation, 
had been fairly well developed before the work of Newton and Leibniz. 
To start the tremendous evolution of the new mathematical analysis 
but one more simple discovery was needed. The two apparently uncon¬ 
nected limiting processes involved in the differentiation and integration 
of a function are intimately related. They are, in fact, inverse to one 
another, like the operations of addition and subtraction, or multiplica¬ 
tion and division. There is no separate differential calculus and integral 
calculus, but only one calculus. 

It was the great achievement of Leibniz and Newton to have first 
clearly recognized and exploited this fundamental theorem of the calculus. 
Of course, their discovery lay on the straight path of scientific develop¬ 
ment and it is only natural that several men should have arrived at a 
clear understanding of the situation independently and at almost the 
same time. 

To formulate the fundamental theorem we consider the integral of a 
function y ^ f(x) from the fixed lower limit a to the variable upper 
limit X. To avoid confusion between the upper limit of integration x 
and the variable x that appears in the symbol /(x), we write this 
integral in the form (see p. 412) 

( 1 ) F(z) = fmdu, 

•'a 

indicating that we wish to study the integral as a function F(x) of the 
upper limit x (Fig. 274). This function F(x) is the area under the curve 



Fif. 374. Tb« intagrml at function of upper limit. 



THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 


437 


y = /(^) from the point w = a to the point w = x. Sometimes the 
integral F{x) with a variable upper limit is called an '^ndefinite'^ 
integral. 

Now the fundamental theorem of the calculus is: 

The derivative of the indefinite integral {!) as a function of x is equal 
to the value of f(u) at the point x: 

F'(x)=f(x). 

In other wordSy the process of integrationy leading from the function f(x) 
to F(x), is undonCy invertedy by the process of differentiationy applied to F(x). 

On an intuitive basis the proof is very easy. It depends on the inter¬ 
pretation of the integral F(x) as an area, and would be obscured if one 
tried to represent F(x) by a graph and the derivative F'(x) by its slope. 
Instead of this original geometrical interpretation of the derivative we 
retain the geometrical explanation of the integral F(x) but proceed in an 
analytical way with the differentiation of F(x). The difference 

F(xi) - F(x) 

is simply the area between x and Xi in Figure 275, and we see that this 



area lies between the values (xi — x)m and (xi — x)M, 

(xi — x)m < F(xi) — F{x) < (xi — x)M, 

where M and m are respectively the greatest and least values of f(u) 
in the interval between x and Xi. For these two products are the areas 



438 


THE CALCULUS 


(Vmi 


of rectangles including the curved area and included in it, respectively. 
Therefore 


„ ^ F(*.) - F(x) 
m s- 


<M. 


We shall assume that the function f(u) is continuous, so that if Xi 
approaches x, then Af and m both approach f(x). Hence we have 

(2) F'(x) = lim = f(x), 

Xi X 

as stated. Intuitively, this expresses the fact that the rate of change 
of the area under the curve y = f(x) as x increases is equal to the height 
of the curve at the point x. 

In certain textbooks the salient point in the fundamental theorem 
is obscured by poorly chosen nomenclature. Many authors first intro¬ 
duce the derivative and then define the ‘‘indefinite integral' simply as 
the inverse of the derivative, saying that 0 (x) is an indefinite integral 
of f(x) if 


Thus their procedure immediately combines differentiation with the 
word “integral.^^ Only later is the notion of the “definite integral*^ as 
an area or as the limit of a sum introduced, without emphasizing that 
the word “integraP^ now means something totally different. In this 
way the main fact of the theory is smuggled in by the back door, and 
the student is seriously impeded in his efforts to attain real under¬ 
standing. We prefer to call functions G{x) for which G'(x) = f{x) not 
“indefinite integrals’' but primitive functions of /(x). The fundamental 
theorem then simply states: 

F(x), the integral of f(u) with fixed lower limit and a variable upper 
limit X, is a primitive function of f(x). 

We say “a” primitive function and not “the” primitive function, for 
it is immediately clear that if G{x) is a primitive function of /(x), then 

H{x) = G{x) + c (c any constant) 

is also a primitive function, since H\x) = G'(x). The converse is also 
true. Two primitive functionsj G(x) and H(x), can di^er only by a covr 
sUmt. For the difference U{x) = G{x) — H{x) has the derivative 
£/'(x) = 0\x) — H\x) = fix) — fix) = 0, and is therefore constant, 
since a function represented by an everywhere horizontal graph must be 
constant. 



THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 


439 


This leads to a most important rule for finding the value of an integral 
between a and 6, provided we know a primitive function Q(x) of ;(x). 
According to our main theorem, 

F{x) = r S{u)du 

is also a primitive function of f(x). Hence F(x) = G{x) + c, where c 
is a constant. The constant c is determined if we remember that F{a) — 

j f(u) du — 0. This gives 0 = 0{a) + c, so that c = —G(a). Then 

the definite integral between the limits o and x will be F(,x) = 

I f(u) du =■ G(x) — G{a), or, if we write b instead of x, 

•'a 

(3) JT f(u)du = G{b) - G(a), 

irrespective of what particular primitive function G(x) we have chosen. 
In other words, 

To evalmte the definite integral / f(x) dx we need only find a function 
G(x) such that G'(x) = f(x), and then form the difference G(b) — G(a). 


2. First Applications. Integration of cos x, sin x. Arc tan x 

It is not possible here to give an adequate idea of the scope of the 
fundamental theorem, but the following illustrations may give some 
indication. In actual problems encountered in mechanics, physics, or 
pure mathematics, it is very often a definite integral whose value is 
wanted. The direct attempt to find the integral as the limit of a sum 
may be diflScult. On the other hand, as we saw in §3, it is compara¬ 
tively easy to perform any kind of differentiation and to accumulate a 
great wealth of information in this field. Each differentiation formula, 
G\x) == f(x)j can be read inversely as providing a primitive function 
G(x) for f(x). By means of the formula (3), this can be exploited for 
calculating the integral of f(x) between any two limits. 

For example, if we want to find the integral of x^ or x* or x"* we can 
now proceed much more simply than in §1. We know from our differ¬ 
entiation formula for x" that the derivative of x** is nx"”\ so that the 
derivative of 


G{x) = 


n+l 


n + 1 


(n 9^ -1) 



440 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIII 


IS 


0 '{x) 


n + 1 


X — X 


[ 


n + 1 

Therefore + 1) is a primitive function of/(x) = and hence 

we have immediately 

x’^dx = 0 (b) - 0 (a) = - -p 4 -. 

This process is much simpler than the laborious procedure of finding the 
integral directly as the limit of a sum. 

More generally, we found in §3 that for any rational s, positive or 
negative, the function x* has the derivative sx*”^ and therefore, for 
s = r + 1 , the function 

1 


G(x) = 


r+l 


r -f -1 

has the derivative/(x) = G'(z) = x^ (We assume r 9 ^ — 1 , i.e. a 9 ^ 0 .) 
Hence x^'*‘^/(r + 1 ) is a primitive function or ‘indefinite integraP' of x*', 
and we have (for a, b positive and r 5 *^ — 1 ) 
rf> 

(4) 


f x'dx= ^ - 0 '+’). 

Ja r+l 


In (4) we suppose that in the interval of integration the integrand af is defined 
and continuous, which excludes x « 0 if r < 0, We therefore make the assump¬ 
tion that in this case a and b are positive. 

For (j(x) = —cos X we have G'(x) = sin x, hence 

/ sin X dx = — (cos a — cos 0 ) = 1 — cos o. 

Jo 

Likewise, since for G(x) = sin x we have G'(x) = cos x, it follows 
that 


r 


cos xdx = sin o — sin 0 “ sin o. 


A particularly interesting result is obtained from the formula for the 
differentiation of the inverse tangent, D arc tan x = 1/(1 + **). It 
follows that the function arc tan x is a primitive function of 1/(1 + x*), 
and we obtain from formula (3) the result 


arc tan b — arc tan 0 


= T— 

Ji, l + x* 


dx. 



FIRST APPLICATIONS 


441 


Now we have arc tan 0 = 0 because to the value 0 of the tangent the 
value 0 of the angle is attached. Hence we find 

1 

(5) arc tan 6 = / - 7-- dx. 

If in particular 6 = 1, then arc tan 6 will be equal to t/ 4, because to 
the value 1 of the tangent corresponds an angle of 45®, or in radian 
measure 7r/4. Thus we obtain the remarkable formula 

( 6 ) 

This shows that the area under the graph of the function y = 1/(1 + x^) 
from X = 0 to a: = 1 is one-fourth of the area of a circle of radius 1. 



Fig. 276, 7r/4 u area under y - 1/(1 4* **) from 0 to 1. 

3. Leibniz’ Formula for ir 


The last result leads to one of the most beautiful mathematical dis¬ 
coveries of the seventeenth century- -Leibniz’ alternating series for ir, 


(7) 


4 1 7'*'9 11 


By the symbol -t- • • • we mean that the sequence of finite “partial 
sums”, formed by breaking off the expression on the right after n 
terms, converges to the limit t/ 4 as n increases. 

To prove this famous formula, we have only to recall the finite geo- 

metrical series .- - = 1 + g + ^* + • • • + 5^'^ ^ or 

1 - q 

= l + g + g^+*-- + • 

1 — g i — g 

In this algebraic identity we substitute g = — x* and obtain 

(8) ■^l-x^ + x*-x*+..-+ (-l)"-‘x‘--* + R„ 

1 + X* 



442 


THE CALCULUS 


(VIII] 


Jtn 


where the ‘‘remainder” Rn is 

Equation (8) can now be integrated between the limits 0 and 1. By 
rule (a) of §3, we have to take on the right the sum of the integrals of 

/ h 

x'^dx — (fc"'*’’ — + 1), 

we find f x”dx = l/(m + 1), and therefore 
Jo 


(9) 


i’r 


dx 


1 -- + -- -+... + (- 1 ) 
3 5 7 TV 


n—1 


+ Tn, 


+ x^ * 3 ' 5 7 ■ • ' 2» - 1 

.1 in 

where T, = (—1)" / r—, — ■,dx. According to (5), the left side of (9) 
Jb 1 + a:' 

is equal to ir/4. The difference between ir/4 and the partial sum 


^ ^ “ I + 5 


+ 


(- 1 )" 


2n - 1 

is 7r/4 — Sn = Tn* What remains is to show that Tn approaches zero 
as n increases. Now 

_2n 


< x' 


,%n 


for 0 < a: < 1. 

•b 


1 + ** - 

Recalling formula (13) of §1, which states that J f{x) dx < j g{x) dx 
if fix) < gix) and o < 5, we see that 

since the right side is equal to l/(2n + 1), as we saw before (formula 
(4)), we find | Tn 1 < l/(2n + 1). Hence 

4 ^ 2n + 1 ■ 

But this shows that Sn tends with increasing n to ir/4, since l/(2n + 1) 
tends to zero. Thus Leibniz’ formula is proved. 


§6. THE EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION AND THE LOGARITHM 

The basic concepts bf the calculus furnish a much more adequate 
theory of the logarithm and the exponential function than does the “ele¬ 
mentary” procedure that underlies the usual instruction in school. 



EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION AND LOGARITHM 


443 


There one usually begins with tiie integral powers a” of a positive number 
a, and then defines = Vthus obtaining the value of for every 
rational r = n/m. The value of a* for any irrational x is next defined 
so as to make a* a continuous function of x, a delicate point which is 
omitted in elementary instruction. Finally, the logarithm of y to the 
base a, 

X = loga y, 

is defined as the inverse function ofy = a*. 

In the following theory of these functions on the basis of the calcu¬ 
lus the order in which they are considered is reversed. We begin 
with the logarithm and then obtain the exponential function. 

1. Definition and Properties of the Logarithm. Euler’s Number e 

We define the logarithm, or more specifically the “natural logarithm,” 
F(x) = log X (its relation to the ordinary logarithm to the base 10 will 
be shown in Article 2), as the area under the curve y = l/u from u = 1 
to u = X, or, what amounts to the same thing, as the integral 

(1) F(x) = log X = f -du 

u 

(see Fig. 5, p. 29). The variable x may be any positive number. Zero 
is excluded because the integrand 1/u becomes infinite as u tends to 0. 

It is quite natural to study the function F(x), For we know that 
the primitive function of any power x’* is a function x^'^^/(n + 1) of the 
same type, except for n = — 1. In the latter case the denominator 
n + 1 would vanish and formula (4), p. 440 would be meaningless. 
Thus we might expect that the integration of 1/x or 1/u would lead 
to some new -and Interesting—type of function. 

Although we consider (1) the definition of the function log x, we do 
not “know” the function until we have derived its properties and have 
found means for its numerical computation. It is quite typical of the 
modern approach that we start with general concepts such as area and 
integral, establish definitions such as (1) on this basis, then deduce 
properties of the objects defined and, only at the very end, arrive at 
explicit expressions for numerical calculation. 

The first important property of log x is an immediate consequence of 
the fundamental theorem of §5. This theorem yields the equation 

(2) F'(x) = 1/x. 



444 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIIIl 


From (2) it follows that the derivative is always positive, which con¬ 
firms the obvious fact that function log a; is a monotone increasing 
function as we travel in the direction of increasing values of x. 

The principal property of the logarithm is expressed by the formula 

(3) log a + log 6 = log (ab). 

The importance of this formula in the practical application of logarithms 
to numerical computations is well known. Intuitively, formula (3) 
could be obtained by looking at the areas defining the three quantities 
log a, log by and log (ab). But we prefer to derive it by a reasoning 
typical of the calculus: Together with the function F(x) = log x we 
consider the second function 

k(x) = log (ax) = log w — F(w)y 

setting w = f(x) = aXy where a is any positive constant. We can easily 
differentiate k(x) by rule (e) of §3: k\x) = F^(w)f(x). By (2), and 
since f'(x) = a, this becomes 

k\x) = a/w = a/ax = 1/x, 

Therefore k(x) has the same derivative as F(x); hence, according to 
page 438, we have 

log (ax) = k(x) = F(x) + c, 

where c is a constant not depending on the particular value of x. The 
constant c is determined by the simple procedure of substituting for x 
the specific number 1. We know from the definition (1) that 

F(l) = log 1 = 0, 

because the defining integral has for x = 1 equal upper and lower limits. 
Hence we obtain 

A(l) = log (a«l) = log a = log 1 + c = c, 
which gives c = log a, and therefore for every x the formula 
(3a) log (ax) = log a + log x. 

Setting X = 6 we obtain the desired formula (3). 

In particular (for a = x), we now find in succession 

log (x*) = 2 log X 

log (x*) = 3 log X. 


(4) 


log (x") = n log X. 




DEFINITION AND PROPERTIES OF LOGARITHM 


445 


Equation (4) shows that for increasing values of x the values of log x 
tend to infinity. For the logarithm is a monotone increasing function 
and we have, for example 

log (2") = n log 2, 

which tends to infinity with n. Furthermore we have 
0 = log 1 = log = log X + log i, 

so that 

(5) log - = - log X, 

X 

Finally, 

(6) log x' = r log X 

Til 

for anv rational number r = —. For, setting = w, we have 

n 

m 

— • n 

n log It == log w" = log x"" = log x”* = m log x, 

so that 

logx** = - logx. 
n 

Since log x is a continuous monotone function of x, having the value 0 
for X = 1 and tending to infinity as x increases, there must be some 
number greater than 1 such that for this value we have log x = 1. 




Following Euler, we call this number e. (The equivalence with the 
definition of p. 298 will be shown later.) Thus e is defined by the 
equation 

(7) 


log c = 1. 




446 


THE CALCULUS 


(VIIIJ 


We have introduced the number e by an intrinsic property which assures 
its existence. Presently we shall carry our analysis further, obtaining 
as a consequence explicit formulas giving arbitrarily exact approximations 
to the numerical value of e. 


2. The Exponential Function 

Summarizing our previous results, we see that the function F(x) = 
log X has the value zero for x = 1, increases monotonically to infinity 
but with decreasing slope 1/x, and for positive values of x less than 1 is 
given by the negative of log 1 /x, so that log x becomes negatively in¬ 
finite as X —♦ 0. 

Because of the monotone character oty = log x we may consider the 
inverse function 

X = E(,y), 

whose graph (Fig. 278) is obtained in the usual way from that of 
y = log X (Fig. 277), and which is defined for all values of y between 
— 00 and -1- 00 . As y tends to — oo the value E(y) tends to zero, and as 
y tends to -F oo E{y) tends to -f oo. 

The JF-function has the following fundamental property: 


(8) E(a).EQ))E{a + h) 

for any pair of values o and 6. This law is merely another form of the 
law (3) for the logarithm. For if we set 

EQ)) =» X, E{a) — z (i.e. 6 = log x, a = log z), 

we have 


and therefore 


log xz = log X -1- log z = 6 + o, 
E{b -f- a) = xz = E(a).E(b), 


which was to be proved. 

Since by definition log e = 1, we have 


^(1) = e, 

and it follows from (8) that e* = E(l)E(l) = E(2), etc. In general, 

E(n) = c" 

ji 

for any integer n. Likewise E{l/n) =» c", so that E(p/q) «= Eil/q) 

1 P 

... E{l/q) = [e«] ; hence, setting p/q = r, we have 

Eir) - e' 



THE EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION 


447 


for any rational r. Therefore it is appropriate to define the operation 
of raising the number e to an irrational power by setting 

e» = E(y) 

for any real number y, since the ^-function is continuous for all values 
of y, and identical with the value of e* for rational y. We can now 
express the fundamental law (8) of the J?-function, or exponential func¬ 
tion, as it is called, by the equation 

(9) eV = 

which is thereby established for arbitrary rational or irrational a and h. 

In all these discussions we have been referring the logarithm and ex¬ 
ponential function to the number e as a "base,” the "natural base” for 
the logarithm. The transition from the base e to any other positive 
number is easily made. We begin by considering the (natural) loga^ 
rithm 



Now we define o* by the compound expression 
(10) 3 = a* = e"* = e* 

For example, 

10* = c* 


We call the inverse function of o* the logarithm to the base a, and we see 
immediately that the natural logarithm of * is x times «; in other words, 
the logarithm of a number z to the base a is obtained by dividing the 
natural logarithm of z by the fixed natural logarithm of o. For o = 10 
this is (to four significant figures) 

log 10 = 2.303. 


3. Formulas for Dififerentiation of e , a*, x* 

Since we have defined the exponential function E(y) as the inverse 
of y = log X, it follows from the rule concerning differentiation of in¬ 
verse functions (§3) that 


dx 



448 


THE CALCULUS 


[ VIIII 


i.e. 

(11) E\y) = E{y). 

The natural exponential function is identical with its derivative. 

This is really the source of all the properties of the exponential func¬ 
tion and the basic reason for its importance in applications, as will 
become apparent in subsequent sections. Using the notation intro¬ 
duced in Section 2 we may write (11) as follows: 

d 


(11a) 


dx 


e = e . 


More generally, differentiating the compound function 

fix) = 6 “*, 

we obtain by the rule of §3 

fix) = ae-* = afix). 

Hence, for a = log a, we find that the function 

fix) = a* 

has the derivative 

fix) = a* log a. 

We may now define the function 

fix) = X* 

for any real exponent s and positive variable x by setting 

a:* = 

Again applying the rule for differentiation of the compound functions, 
fix) = e“\z = log x, we find/'(a:) = ^ 

fix) = 

in accordance with our previous result for rational s. 

4. Explicit Expressions for e, and log x as Limits 

To find explicit formulas for these functions we shall exploit the differ¬ 
entiation formulas for the exponential function and the logarithm. 
Since the derivative of the function log x is 1/x, by the definition of 
the derivative we obtain the relation 

X Xi — X 


•- and therefore 

X 



EXPRESSIONS FOR e, «•, log x AS LIMITS 


449 


If we set Xi = a: + A and let h tend to zero by running through the 
sequence 

A= 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, ...,1/n, 
then, on applying the rules of logarithms, we find 

By writing z = l/x and using again the laws for the logarithm we obtain 


[(-O’] 


as n 


as 71 


z = lim log I 

In terms of the exponential function, 

( 12 ) e‘ = lim ^1 + 

Here we have the famous formula defining the exponential function as 
a simple limit. In particular, for 2 = 1 we find 

(13) e = lim (1 + 1/n)”, 
and for z = — 1, 

1 


(13a) 


= lim (1 — l/n)^ 


These expressions lead at once to expansions in the form of infinite 
series. By the binomial theorem we find that 




1 ^ ~ 1) * L n(n - l)(n - 2) x' ^ 

n 2! n* 3! n* n’* 


or 


It is plausible and not difficult to justify completely (the details are 
omitted here) that we can perform the passage to the limit as n —► <» 

by replacing i by 0 in each term. This gives the famous infinite series 

for e* 

(14) e*=l + ^ + |-, + |i+.-., 



450 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


and in particular the series for e, 

1 _1_ 1 . 1 _1_ 1 _1_ 1 -L 

V hich establishes the identity of e with the number defined on page 298. 
For X = — 1 we obtain the series 


e 2! 3! “^4! 5! 


which gives an excellent numerical approximation with very few terms, 
the total error involved in breaking off the series at the nth term being 
less than the magnitude of the (n + l)st term. 

By exploiting the differentiation formula for the exponential function 
we can obtain an interesting expression for the logarithm. We have 

— 1 e 


lim 


= lim 


= 1 


as h tends to 0, because this limit is the derivative of e*' for y = 0, and 
this is equal to 6° = 1. In this formula we substitute for h the values 
z/n, where z is an arbitrary number and n ranges over the sequence of 
positive integers. This gives 


or 

n{\/^ — l) —> 2 

as n tends to infinity. Writing z = log x or e* = x, we finally obtain 
(15) logx = lim n('^x — l) as n—>00. 

Since 1 as n —» 00 (see p. 323), this represents the logarithm as 

the limit of a product, one of whose factors tends to zero and the other 
to infinity. 

Miscellaneous Examples and Exercises, By including the exponential function 
and the logarithm we now master a large class of functions and have access to 

many applications. _ 

Differenti ate: 1) x(\og x - 1). 2) log (log x). 3) log (x -f- \/l 4- x*), 4) 
log (x 4* y/l — x^), 5) e~* . 6) e** (a compound function e* with 2 - «•). 7) 
(Hint: x* » c**««*)• 8) log tan x, 9) log sin x; log cos x, 10) x/log x. 
Find the maxima and minima of 11) 12) 13) xe”**. 

*14) Find the locus of the maximum point of the curve y = xe"** as a varies. 
16) Show that all the successive derivatives of c”** have the form e"** multiplied 
by a polynomial in x. 



EXPRESSIONS FOR e, e*, log x AS LIMITS 


451 


*16) Show that the nth derivative of has the form * 1 / 2 multiplied 
by a polynomial of degree 2n — 2. 

*17) Logarithmic differentiation. By using the fundamental property of the 
logarithm, the differentiation of products can sometimes be effected in a simplified 
manner. We have for a product of the form 

p{x) - Mx)ft(x) - --Mx), 

D{\og p{x)) - D(Iog/i(x)) + D(\ogMx)) + ••• + Ddogfnix)), 
and hence, by the rule for differentiating compound functions, 

P'(x) ^ fi'(x) fi(x) fn'(x) 

p(x) fi(x) fi(x) fn(x) ‘ 

Use this for differentiating 

a) x(x -I- l)(a; -f 2) ••• (x + n), b) X6“»**. 

5. Infinite Series for the Logarithm. Numerical Calculation 

It is not formula (15) that serves as the basis for numerical calculation 
of the logarithm. A quite different and more useful explicit expression 
of great theoretical importance is far better suited to this purpose. We 
shall obtain this expression by the method used on page 441 for finding 
TT, exploiting the definition of the logarithm by formula (1). One small 
preparatory step is needed; instead of aiming at log x, we shall try to 
express y = log (1 + ^r), composed of the functions y = log z and 

z = I + X. We have ^ = = “•! = q-r— . Hence log (1 + x) 

ax dz ax z 1 + z 

is a primitive function of 1/(1 + x), and we infer by the fundamental 
theorem that the integral of 1/(1 + u) from 0 to a: is equal to 
log (1 + x) — log 1 = log (1 + x); in symbols, 

(16) log (1 + a;) = f du. 

Jo 1 "t" w 

(Of course, this formula could just as well have been obtained intuitively 
from the geometrical interpretation of the logarithm as an area. Com¬ 
pare p. 413.) 

In formula (16) we insert, as on page 442, the geometrical series for 
(1 + u)“\ writing 

.- 4 - = !- «+«’-«•+...++(- 1 )" 4 -* 

1 + w I + u 

where, cautiously, we choose to write down not an infinite series, but 
rather a finite series with the remainder 



452 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIII] 


Substituting this series in (16) we may use the rule that such a (finite) 
sum can be integrated term by term. The integral of u* from 0 to x 


yields 




s+l 


, and thus we obtain immediately 


X* x^ 

log (1 + *) = a; + 


+ (-ir‘- + r„, 


n 


where the remainder Tn is given by 

r.* (-ir fr^du. 

Jo 1 + u 

We shall now show that Tn tends to zero for increasing n provided that 
x is chosen greater than —1 and not greater than +1, in other words, 
for 


-1 <x<l, 

where it is to be noted that a; = +1 is included, while x = —1 is not. 
According to our assumption, in the interval of integration u is greater 
than a number —a, which may be near to — 1 but is at any rate greater 
than —1, so that 0<1 — a<l + w. Hence in the interval from 0 
to x we have 


1 + w 


*“ 1 - 


and therefore 


\Tn\< 


1 - 


du 


or 


Tn\ < 


in+l 


- 1 


a n + I ”“1 — an+1 

Since 1 — a is a fixed factor, we see that for increasing n this expression 
tends to 0 so that from 


(17) 


log 




1 


- 1 -an+ 1’ 


we obtain the infinite series 

(18) log (1 + *) = * - ^ + ^ - ^ + 


’ *1 


which is valid for — 1 < a: < 1. 



fNFINITE SERIES FOR LOGARITHM 


453 


If, in particular, we choose x = 1, we obtain the interesting result 

(19) log2= 1 - i + 1 - i + 

This formula has a structure similar to that of the series for 7r/4. 

The series (18) is not a very practical means for finding numerical 
values for the logarithm, since its range is limited to values of 1 + x 
between 0 and 2, and since its convergence is so slow that one must 
include many terms before obtaining a reasonably accurate result. 
By the following device we can obtain a more convenient expression. 
Replacing a: by — x in (18) we find 

(20) log (1 - *) = -a: - ^ ^ ^ - ... . 


Subtracting (20) from (18) and using the fact that log a — log 6 = log a 
+ log ( 1 / 6 ) = log (a/ 6 ), we obtain 

(21) logi±| = 2(a: + | + ^+ 

Not only does this series converge much faster, but now the left side 

j -j- ^ 

can express the logarithm of any positive number z, since ^ 

always has a solution x between —1 and + 1 . Thus, if we want to 
calculate log 3 we set a; = i and obtain 

log 3 = log p—I = 2^~2 + 3 :^ + ,^ + • • •)• 

2 1 

With only 6 terms, up to = 77 'oFi > value 

log 3 = 1.0986, 

which is accurate to five digits. 

§7. DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 

1. Definition 

The dominating r61e of the exponential and trigonometrical functions 
in mathematical analysis and its applications to physical problems is 
rooted in the fact that these functions solve the simplest “differential 
equations.” 

A differential equation for an unknown function u = f(x) with dcriva- 




454 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


tive tt' =» /'(*)—the notation «' is a very useful abbreviation for /'(x) 
as long as the quantity u and its dependence on x as the function /(x) 
need not be sharply distinguished—^is an equation involving u, u', and 
possibly the independent variable x, as for example 

tt' = « + sin (xw) 


or 

«' + 3« = X*. 

More generally, a differential equation may involve the second deriva* 
tive, tt" = /"(*), or higher derivatives, as in the example 

+ 2u' — 3« 0. 

In any case the problem is to find a function u <= /(x) that satisfies 
the given equation. Solving a differential equation is a wide generaliza¬ 
tion of the problem of integration in the sense of finding the primitive 
function of a given function g(x), which amounts to solving the simple 
differential equation 

u' = g{x). 

For example, the solutions of the differential equation 

= X* 

are the functions u = xV3 + c, where c is any constant. 


2. The Differential Equation of the Exponential Function. Radioactive 
Disintegration. Law of Growth. Compound Interest 

The differential equation 

(1) u' — u 

has as a solution the exponential function u = e*, since the exponential 
function is its own derivative. More generally, the function u = ce*, 
where c is any constant, is a solution of (1). Similarly, the function 

(2) « = ce^ 

where c and k are any two constants, is a solution of the differential 
equation 

(3) tt' e= ku. 

Conversely, any function u /(x) satisfying equation (3) must be 
of the form ce**. For if x = h(u) is the inverse function of « = /(x). 



DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION OF EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION 466 


th^ according to the rule for finding the derivative of an inverse func¬ 
tion we have 



But is a primitive function of so that x = ft(u) = + 6, 

where h is some constant. Hence 


and 


log u = kx — bk, 


Setting e““ 


(which is a constant) equal to c, we have 


as was to be proved. 

The great significance of the differential equation (3) lies in the fact 
that it governs physical processes in which a quantity u of some sub¬ 
stance is a function of the time t, 

u = fit), 

and in which the quantity u is changing at each instant at a rate pro¬ 
portional to the value of u at that instant. In such a case, the rate of 
change at the instant t, 


u' = fit) = lim 


fill) - fit) 

ti - t 


f 


is equal to Am, where A is a constant, A being positive if u is increasing 
and negative if u is decreasing. In either case, u satisfies the differential 
equation (3); hence 


The constant c is determined if we know the amount Uo which was 



Fig. 279. Exponential decay, u ■■ uoe**. * < 0. 


456 


THE CALCULUS 


[ VIIIl 


present at the time ^ » 0. We must obtain this amount if we set 
t « 0, 

tio ** cc® =» c, 


so that 

(4) u = tioe**. 

Note that we start with a knowledge of the rate of change of u and deduce 
the law (4) which gives the actual amount of u at any time L This is 
just the inverse of the problem of finding the derivative of a function. 

A typical example is that of radioactive disintegration. Let u *= f{t) 
be the amount of some radioactive substance at the time t\ then on the 
hypothesis that each individual particle of the substance has a certain 
probability of disintegrating in a given time, and that the probability 
is unaffected by the presence of other such particles, the rate at which 
u is disintegrating at a given time t will be proportional to w, i.e. to the 
total amount present at that time. Hence u will satisfy (3) with a 
negative constant k that measures the speed of the disintegration proc¬ 
ess, and therefore 

u = 

It follows that the fraction of u which disintegrates in two equal time 
intervals is the same; for if Ui is the amount present at time ti and u% 
the amount present at some later time h , then 

Ut _ _ ««,-«,) 

«i ■ «««*'• 

which depends only on . To find out how long it will take for 

a given amount of the substance to disintegrate until only half of it is 
left, we must determine 5 = <2 — so that 


from which we find 



jf 


> 


(5) ks = log s = (—log 2)/k, or k = (—log 2)/a. 


For any radioactive substance, the value of « is called the half-life 
period, and a or some similar value (such as the value r for which 
ut/ui = 999/1000) can be found by experiment. For radium, the half- 
life period is about 1550 years, and 


k 


logj 

1550 


-0.0000447. 



DIFFERENTIAL EQUATION OF EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION 457 


It follows that 

,, _ ,, .-«.000M47( 

u = ti^»e 

An example of a law of growth that is approximately exponential 
is provided by the phenomenon of compound interest. A given amount 
of money, uo dollars, is placed at 3% compound interest, which is to be 
compounded yearly. After 1 year, the amount of money will be 

Ui = Wo(l "h 0.03), 

after 2 years it will be 

U2 = ui(l + 0.03) = Wo(l + 0.03)^ 
and after t years it will be 
(6) ut = Mi + 0.03)*. 


Now if, instead of being compounded at yearly intervals, the interest is 
compounded after each month or after each nth part of a year, then 
after t years the amount will be 

If n is taken very large, so that the interest is compounded every day 
or even every hour, then as n tends to infinity the quantity in the 
brackets, according to §6, approaches and in the limit the 
amount after t years would be 


which corresponds to a continuous process of compounding interest. 
We may also calculate the time 5 taken for the original capital to double 

= 2, so that 


Uo*e 


.03# 


Uo 


at 3% continuous compound interest. We have 
100 

5 = — log 2 = 23.10. Thus the money will have doubled after about 
o 


twenty-three years. 

Instead of following this step-by-step procedure and then passing to 
the limit, we could have derived the formula (7) simply by saying that 
the rate of increase u' of the capital is proportional to u with the factor 
k = .03, so that 


w' = kUf where k = .03. 


The formula (7) then follows from the general result (4). 



468 


THE CALCULUS 


ivnii 


3. Other Examples. Simplest Vibrations 

The exponential function often occurs in more complicated combina¬ 
tions. For example, the function 

( 8 ) u - 

where ft is a positive constant, is a solution of the differential equation 

w' = *-2ftxu. 

The function (8) is of fundamental importance in probability and sta¬ 
tistics, since it defines the ^^normaP’ frequency distributions. 

The trigonometric functions w == cos t; = sin / also satisfy a very 
simple differential equation. We have first 

u' = —sin t = — v, 
v' = cost = u, 

which is a ‘‘system of two differential equations for two functions." 
By differentiating again, we find 



so that both functions u and v of the time variable t can be considered 
as solutions of the same differential equation 

(9) z" + z^ 0, 

which is a very simple differential equation of the “second order," i.e. 
involving the second derivative of z. This equation and its generaliza¬ 
tion with a positive constant ft*, 

( 10 ) z" + ft*z = 0 , 

for which z = cos kt and z = sin kt are solutions, occur in the study of 
vibrations. This is why the oscillating curves u — sin kt and u = cos kt 



Flg.S80. 


OTHER EXAMPLES 


469 


(Fig. 280) form the backbone of the theory of vibrating mechanisms. 
It should be stated that the differential equation (10) represents the 
ideal case, where there is no friction or resistance. Resistance is ex¬ 
pressed in the differential equation of vibrating mechanisms by another 
term rz\ 

( 11 ) 2 " + rz^ + kh = 0 , 

and the solutions now are ^^amped^' vibrations, mathematically ex¬ 
pressed by the formula 

cos sin wf; w = ^- ^0* 

and graphically represented by Figure 281. (As an exercise the reader 



may verify these solutions by performing the differentiations.) Tbd 
oscillations here are of the same type as those of the pure sine or cosine, 
but they are cut down in their intensity by an exponential factor, de¬ 
creasing more or less rapidly according to the size of the friction co- 
eflScient r. 


460 


THE CALCULUS 


I VIII1 


4. Newton’s Law of Dynamics 

Although a more detailed analysis of these facts is beyond our scope, 
we wish to bring them under the general aspect of the fundamental 
concepts with which Newton revolutionized mechanics and physics. 
He considered the motion of a particle with mass m and space co¬ 
ordinates a:(0, y{t)y z(i) which are functions of the time t, so that the 
components of the acceleration are the second derivatives, x"(t), y^\t)y 
The all-important step was Newton's realization that the quan¬ 
tities mx", my^\ mz^* can be considered as the components of force 
acting on the particle. At first sight this might appear to be only a 
formal definition of the word ‘‘force" in physics. But Newton's great 
achievement was to have shaped this definition in accordance with the 
actual phenomena of nature, inasmuch as nature very often provides 
a field of such forces which are known to us in advance without our 
knowing anything about the particular motion we want to study. 
Newton's greatest triumph in dynamics, the justification of Kepler's 
law for the motion of the planets, shows clearly the harmony between 
his mathematical concept and nature. Newton first assumed that the 
attraction of gravity is inversely proportional to the square of the dis¬ 
tance. If we put the sun at the origin of the coordinate system, and 
if a given planet has the coordinates x, y, z, then it follows that the 
components of the force in the x, y, z directions are equal, respectively, to 


—fc. 


X 





z 


where A; is a gravit ational constant not depending on the time, and 
r = \/x2 -f. y2 + 2:2 jg the distance from the sun to the planet. These 
expressions determine the local field of force, irrespective of the motion 
of a particle in the field. Now this knowledge of the field of forces is 
combined with Newton's general law of dynamics (i.e. his expression 
for the force in terms of the motion); equating the two different expres¬ 
sions yields the equations 


mx" = 


—tx 


(x2 + y^ + z2)8/2> 


my'' = 


—Jcy 


(a;2 + y2^ 

-“kz 

(a;2 + y2 + 22)3/2’ 



NEWTON^S LAW OF DYNAMICS 


461 


a system of three differential equations for three unknown, functions 
x(t)y y{t)y 2(0- This system can be solved, and it turns out that, in 
accordance with Kepler^s empirical observations, the orbit of the planet 
is a conic section with the sun at one focus, the areas swept out by a 
line joining the sun to the planet are equal for equal time intervals, and 
the squares of the periods of complete revolution for two planets are 
proportional to the cubes of their distances from the sun. We must 
omit the proof. 

The problem of vibrations provides a more elementary illustration of 
Newton^s method. Suppose that we have a particle moving along a 
straight line, the a;-axis, and tied to the origin by an elastic force, such 
as a spring or a rubber band. If the particle is removed from its posi¬ 
tion of equilibrium at the origin to a position given by the coordinate x, 
the force will pull it back with an intensity that we assume propor¬ 
tional to the extension x; since the force is directed towards the origin, 
it will be represented by — Aj^x, where — A;Ms a negative factor of pro¬ 
portionality expressing the strength of the elastic spring or rubber band. 
Furthermore, we assume that there is^ friction retarding the motion, 
and that this friction is proportional to the velocity x' of the particle, 
with a factor of proportionality — r. Then the total force at any moment 
will be given by —k^x — rx', and according to Newton^s general prin¬ 
ciple we find mx" = — k^x — rx' or 

mx" + rx' -+■ k^x = 0. 

This is exactly the differential equation (11) of damped vibrations 
mentioned above. 

This simple example is of great importance, since many types of 
vibrating mechanical and electrical systems can be described mathe¬ 
matically by exactly this differential equation. Here we have a typical 
instance where an abstract mathematical formulation bares with one 
stroke the innermost structure of many apparently quite different and 
unconnected individual phenomena. This abstraction from the par¬ 
ticular nature of a given phenomenon to a formulation of the general 
law which governs the whole class of phenomena is one of the charac¬ 
teristic features of the mathematical treatment of physical problems. 



SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER VIII 


§1. MATTERS OF PRINCIPLE 

1. Differentiability 

We have linked the concept of derivative of a function y = fix) with 
the intuitive idea of tangent to the graph of the function. Since the 
general concept of function is so wide, it is necessary in the interests of 
logical completeness to do away with this dependence on geometrical 
intuition. For we have no guarantee that the intuitive facts familiar 
from the consideration of simple curves such as circles and ellipses will 
necessarily subsist for the graphs of more complicated functions. Con¬ 
sider, for example, the function in Figure 282, whose graph has a comer. 



Fif. 282 y > z +1 s |. Fif. 283. y • | z |. Fi(. 284. y»z + |>| + 

(z-l) + lz-l|. 


This function is defined by the equation y = x + \ x\, where I a: | is 
the absolute value of x, i.e. 

y = X + X = 2x for x > 0, 

y = X — X = 0 for x < 0. 

Another such example is the function y = |x |; still another is the 
function y = x-f-lxl-f(x — l)-l-|x — 1|. The graphs of these 
functions fail to have a definite tangent or direction at certain points; 
this means that the functions do not possess derivatives for the corre¬ 
sponding values of x. 

Exercitet: 1) Form the function f(x) whose graph is one-half of a regular 
hexagon. 

2) Where are the corners of the graph of 

/(*) -(*+1 *1) + IK* _ I) + I * - 11) + IK* - i) + I * - i Ilf 
What are the discontinuities of f'(x)1 


462 



DIFFERENTIABILITY 


46 » 


For another simple example of non-differentiability, we consider the 
function 

y = /(*) » X sin 

X 

which is obtained from the function sin 1/x (see p. 283) by multiplica¬ 
tion by the factor x; we define/(x) to be zero for x = 0. Tb's function, 
whose graph for positive values of x is shown in Figure 285, is con¬ 



tinuous everywhere. The graph oscillates infinitely often in the neigh¬ 
borhood of X = 0, the .“waves” becoming very small as we approach 
X «= 0. The slope of these waves is given by 

/'(x) = sm - — cos - 

XXX 


(the reader may verify this as an exercise); as x tends to 0 this slope 
oscillates between ever-increasing positive and negative bounds. For 
X =5 0 we may try to find the derivative as the limit for /i. —♦ 0 of the 
difference quotient 


/(o + h)- m 

h 


hsin^ 


sin 


1 

h' 


h 


464 


THE CALCULUS 


[ VIIIJ 


But as A —> 0 this difference quotient oscillates between —1 and +1 
and does not approach a limit; hence the function cannot be differenti¬ 
ated at X = 0. 

These examples indicate a difficulty inherent in the subject. Weier- 
strass has most strikingly illustrated the situation by constructing a 
continuous function whose graph does not have a tangent at any point. 
While differentiability implies continuity, this shows that continuity 
does not imply differentiability, since Weierstrass' function is con¬ 
tinuous and nowhere differentiable. In practice such difficulties will 
not arise. Except perhaps for isolated points, curves will be smooth 
and differentiation will not only be possible but will yield a continuous 
derivative. Why, then, should we not simply stipulate that ‘^patho- 
logical*’ phenomena are to be absent in problems under consideration? 
This is exactly what one does in the calculus, where only differentiable 
functions are considered. In Chapter VIII we carried out the differ¬ 
entiation of a large class of functions and thereby proved their differen¬ 
tiability. 

Since the differentiability of a function is not a logical matter of 
course, it must either be assumed or proved. The concept of tangent 
or direction of a curve, originally the basis for the concept of deriva¬ 
tive, is then derived from the purely analytical definition of derivative: 
If the function y = f{x) posessses a derivative, i.e. if the difference 
. f{x + A) - f{x) 


quotient" 


has a single limit /'(x) as A tends to 0 from 


either side, then the corresponding curve is said to have a tangent with 
the slope /'(x). Thus the naive attitude of Fermat, Leibniz, and New¬ 
ton is reversed in the interests of logical cogency. 


Exercises: 1) Show that the continuous function defined by sin (l/x) has 
a derivative at x = 0. 

2) Show that the function arc tan (l/x) is discontinuous for x = 0, that 
X arc tan (l/x) is continuous there but has no derivative, and that x* arc tan (l/x) 
has a derivative at x « 0. 


2 . The Integral 

The situation is similar with respect to the integral of a continuous 
function /(x). Instead of considering the ‘‘area under the curve^^ 
y = /(^) as a quantity which obviously exists and which can be ex¬ 
pressed a posteriori as the limit of a sum, we define the integral by this 
limit, and consider the concept of integral as the primary basis from 
which the general concept of area is afterward derived. This attitude 



THE INTEGRAL 


466 


is forced upon us by a realization of the vagueness of geometrical intui¬ 
tion when applied to analytical concepts as general as that of continuous 
function. We start by forming a sum 

(1) Sn = ““ 3^1—l) = 

j-1 

where Xo = a, Xi, • • • , Xn = 6 is a subdivision of the interval of integra¬ 
tion, Ax, = Xy — Xj^i is the x-difference or length of the jth subinterval, 
and Vj is an arbitrary value of x in this subinterval, i.e. xy^i < Vj < xy. 
(We may take, for example, vy = xy or Vj = xy_i.) Now we form a 
sequence of such sums in which the number n of subintervals increases 
and at the same time the maximum length of the subintervals decreases 
to zero. Then the main fact is: The sum Sn for a given continuous 
function /(x) tends to a definite limit vl, which is independent of the 
specific way in which the subintervals and points vy are chosen. By 

definition, this limit is the integral = / f{x)dx. Of course, the exist- 

Ja 

ence of this limit requires analytical proof if we do not wish to rely on 
an intuitive geometrical notion of area. This proof is given in every 
rigorous textbook on the calculus. 

Comparing differentiation and integration, we are confronted with 
the following antithetical situation. Differentiability is definitely a re¬ 
strictive condition on a continuous function, but the actual carrying out 
of the differentiation, i.e. the algorithm of the differential calculus, is in 
practice a straightforward procedure based on a few simple rules. On 
the other hand, every continuous function without exception possesses 
an integral between any two given limits. But the explicit calculation 
of such integrals, even for quite simple functions, is in general a very 
difficult task. At this point the fundamental theorem of the calculus 
becomes in many cases the decisive instrument for carrying out the 
integration. However, for most functions, even for very elementary 
ones, integration does not yield simple explicit expressions, and the 
numerical computation of integrals requires advanced methods. 

3. Other Applications of the Concept of Integral. Work. Length 

Dissociating the analytical notion of integral from its original geome¬ 
trical interpretation, we meet a number of other, equally important, 
interpretations and applications. For example, the integral can be 
interpreted in mechanics as expressing the concept of work. The fol¬ 
lowing simplest case will suflSce for our explanation. Suppose a mass 



466 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


moves along the z-axis under the influence of a force directed along 
the axis. This mass is thought of as concentrated at the point with 
the coordinate z, and the force is given as a function/(z) of the position, 
the sign of /(z) indicating whether it points in the positive or negative 
z-direction. If the force is constant and moves the mass from a to b, 
then the work done is given by the product, (b — a)/, of the intensity j 
of the force and the distance traversed by the mass. But if the in¬ 
tensity varies with z, we shall have to define the amount of work done 
by a limiting process (as we defined velocity). To this end we divide 
the interval from a to b as before into small subintervals by the points 
zo = a, Zi, • • • , Zn «= 6; then we imagine that in each subinterval the 
force is constant and equal, say, to /(z,), the actual value at the end¬ 
point, and calculate the work that would correspond to this stepwise 
varying force: 

n 

Sfi — 53 

ir-1 

If we now refine the subdivision as before and let n increase, we see that 
the sum tends to the integral 

jf /(z)dz. 

Thus the work done by a continuously varying force is defined by an 
integral. 

As an example let us consider a mass m fastened by an elastic spring 
to the origin z = 0. The force /(z) will, in line with the discussion on 
page 461, be proportional to z, 

fix) = -k\ 

where k* is a positive constant. Then the work done by this force if 
the mass moves from the origin to the position x - b will be 

f — fc*zdz = — A:*^, 

Jt 2 


and the work we must do against this force, if we want to pull out the 

spring to this position, is+ k ^-=. 

2 

A second application of the general notion of integral is to the concept 
of arc length of a curve. Let us suppose that the portion of the curve 
under consideration is represented by a function y = fix) whose deriva¬ 
tive/(z) ^ is slso a continuous function. To define length we pro- 



APPLICATIONS 


467 


ceed exactly as though we had to measure a curve for practical purposes 
with a straight yardstick. We inscribe in the arc AB a polygon with 
n small edges, measure the total length Ln of this polygon, and consider 
the length Ln as an approximation; letting n increase and the maximum 
length of the edges of the polygon decrease toward zero, we define 

L = lim Ln 

as the length of the arc AB, (In Chapter VI the length of a circle 
was obtained in this way as the limit of the perimeters of inscribed 
regular n-gons.) It can be shown that for sufficiently smooth curves 
this limit exists and is independent of the specific way in which the se¬ 
quence of inscribed polygons is chosen. Curves for which this holds 
are said to be rectifiable. Any ‘treasonable*^ curve that arises in theory 
or applications will be rectifiable, and we shall not dwell on the investi¬ 
gation of pathological cases. It will suffice to show that the arc AB, 
for a function y = f(x) with a continuous derivative f(x), has a length 
L in this sense, and that L can be expressed by an integral. 

To this end, let us denote the a:-co6rdinates of A and Bhy a and h 
respectively, then subdivide the x-interval from a to 6 as before by the 
points xo = a, xi, • • • , X/, . • • , Xn = h, with the differences Ax,- = 
X/ — x,-i, and consider the polygon with the vertices x,*, = /(x,) 

above these points of subdivision. A single edge of the polygon will 



Fig. 286. Arc length. 


have the length \/(x,- — + (v> ~ — 's/ 

Ax, ^ 1 + (^“-J- Hence we have for the total length of the polygoi 

If now n tends to infinity, the difference quotients ^ will tend to the 



468 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


derivative ^ = /'(*) and we obtain for the length L the integral 
ax 

expression 


( 2 ) 


L = 


r vi +(/'(*))* dx. 

*fa 


Without going into further details of this theoretical discussion we 
make two supplementary remarks. First, if B is considered as a variable 
point on the curve with the coordinate x, then L = L(x) becomes a 
function of x, and we have by the fundamental theorem, 

L'(x) = = Vl + [f'(x)Y, 


a frequently used formula. Second, while formula (2) gives the 
‘^general'’ solution of the problem, it hardly yields an explicit expression 
for arc length in particular cases. For this we have to substitute the 
specific function f(x), or rather f(x), in (2), and then to undertake the 
actual integration of the expression obtained. Here the difficulty is 
in general insurmountable if we restrict ourselves to the realm of the 
elementary functions considered in this book. We shall mention a few 
cases in which the integration is possible. The function 

y = fix) = y/l - ^ 


dv 

represents the unit circle; we have/'(a;) = — 

ax 


•, whence 


Vl - 

Vl +nxf = 3 =^ 2 » length of a circular arc is given 

by the integral 

dx 

•'o 


Vl - 


= arc sin h — arc sin a. 


For the parabola y = x^ we have f'(x) = 2a: and the arc length from 
x = 0toa: = 6is 


Vl + 4a:2 dx. 


For the curve y = log sin x we have f{x) = cot x and the arc length 
is expressed by 



eoi^xdx. 



APPLICATIONS 


469 


We shall be content with merely writing down these integral expres¬ 
sions. They could be evaluated with a little more technique than we 
have at our command, but we shall go no farther in this direction. 

§2. ORDERS OF MAGNITUDE 

1 . The Exponential Function and Powers of x 

Frequently in mathematics we encounter sequences an which tend 
to infinity. Often we need to compare such a sequence with another 
sequence, K , also tending to infinity, but perhaps 'Taster'' than an . 
To make this concept precise, we shall say that bn tends to infinity 
faster than an , or has a higher order, of magnitude than an , if the 
ratio an/hn (numerator and denominator of which both tend to infinity) 
tends to zero as n increases. Thus the sequence bn = nf tends to in¬ 
finity faster than the sequence an = n, and the latter in turn faster 
than Cn = y/uj for 

Ufi_ n _ 1 _^ Q Cn _ y/n _ 1 _ ^ q 

bn n an n -y/ fi 

z' 

It is clear that n* tends to infinity faster than n whenever s > r > 0, 
since then nV^* = —> 0. 

If the ratio an/bn approaches a finite constant c, different from zero, 
we say that the two sequences an and bn approach infinity at the same 
rate or have the same order of magnitude. Thus On = and 
bn = 2n* + n have the same order of magnitude, since 

an _ _ 1 1 

~ 2n2 + n 2 -f i ^ 
n 

One might think that with the powers of n as a yardstick one could 
measure the different degrees of becoming infinite for any sequence an 
that tends to infinity. To do this one would have to find a suitable 
power n* with the same order of magnitude as an ; i.e. such that Un/n* 
tends to a finite constant different from zero. It is a remarkable fact 
that this is by no means always possible, since the exponential function 
a“ with a > 1 (e.g. e*") tends to inUnity faster than any power n*, however 
large we choose s, while log n tends to infinity slower than any power n*, 
however small the positive exponent s. In other words, we have the rela¬ 
tions 


( 1 ) 


n 

a* 


0 



470 


THE CALCULUS 


(VIlll 


and 

(2) !2*^-.0 

n* 

as n —> 00 . The exponent s here need not be an integer, but may be 
any fixed positive number. 

To prove (1) we first simplify the statement by taking the sth root 
of the ratio; if the root tends to zero, the original ratio does also. Hence 
we need only prove that 



as n increases. Let b = since a is assumed to be greater than 
1, b and also \/b = 6* will be greater than 1. We may write 

6* = 1 + g, 

where q is positive. Now by the inequality (6) on page 15, 

6"'* = (1 + g)** > 1 + ng > ng, 

so that 

a =0 ^ 
and 

n ^ 

an/$ Yf2q2 ^^2* 

Since the latter quantity tends to zero as n increases, the proof is 
complete. 

As a matter of fact, the relation 
(3) ^-.0 

holds when x becomes infinite in any manner by running through a 
sequence Xi, Xa, • • • , which need not coincide with the sequence 
1, 2, 3, • • • of positive integers. For if n — 1 < x < n, then 

X . n ^ n 

-z < = a*--—>0. 

a* ^ 

This remark may be used to prove (2). Setting x = log n and 
e* = a, so that n = 6* and n* = (e*)*, the ratio in (2) becomes 

X 

which is the special case of (3) for 8*1. 



EXPONENTIAL FUNCTION AND POWERS OF * 


471 


Exercises: 1) Prove that for x -> <» the function log log x tends to infinity 
more slowly than log x. 2) The derivative of x/log x is 1/log x — l/(log x)*. 
Prove that for large x it is “asymptotically^* equivalent to the first term, 
1/log X, i.e. that their ratio tends to 1 as x ». 

2* Order of Magnitude of log (nl) 

In many applications, e.g. in the theory of probability, it is important 
to know the order of magnitude or “asymptotic behavior^^ of nl for large 
values of w. We shall here be content with studying the logarithm of 
n\f i.e. the expression 

Pn = log 2 + log 3 + log 4 +...+ log n. 

We shall show that the “asymptotic value'^ of Pn is given by n log n; 
i.e. that 

l og(n!) j 
n log n 


as n —► 00 . 

The proof is typical of a much used method of comparing a sum with 
an integral. In Figure 287 the sum Pn is equal to the sum of the areas. 


y 



of the rectangles whose tops are marked by solid lines, ^nd which 
together do not exceed the area 

J log xdx = (n + 1) tog (n + 1) — (n + 1) + 1 

under the logarithmic curve from 1 to n + 1 (see p. 450, Exercise 1)). 
But the sum Pn is likewise equal to the total area of the rectangles whose 


472 


THE CALCULUS 


(VIIIJ 


tops are marked by broken lines and which together exceed the area 
under the cuiwe from 1 to n, given by 

^ log zdx = n log n — n + 1. 

Thus we have 

n log n - n +"l < Pn < '(n + 1) log (n + 1) — n, 
and dividing by n log n, 

1 - < (1 + l/») - > 

log n n log n n log n log n log n 

_ loen + log(l,+ lW _ 1 

log n log n 

Obviously the two bounds tend to 1 as n tends to infinity, and our 
statement is proved. 

Exercise: Prove that the two bounds are greater than 1 — 1/n and less than 
1 -h 1/n respectively. 

§3. INFINITE SERIES AND PRODUCTS 
1. Infinite Series of Functions 

As we have already stated, expressing a quantity s as an infinite series, 

(1) 5 = 6i + 62 + 63 + • • • , 

is nothing but a convenient^mbolism for the statement that s is the 
limit, as n increases, of the sequence of finite ‘‘partial sums”, 

Si , 52 , 58 > • • • J 

where 

(2) 5n = 61 + 62 + • • • + . 

Thus the equation (1) is equivalent to the limiting relation 

(3) lim 5n == 5 as n— 

where Sn is defined by (2). When the limit (3) exists we say that the 
series (1) converges to the value 5, while if the limit (3) does not exist, 
we say that the series diverges. 

Thus, the series 



INFINITE SERIES OF FUNCTIONS 


473 


converges to the value 7 r/ 4 , and the series 

1 “ I + I 1 + • • • 

converges to the value log 2 ; on the other hand, the series 
1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + ... 

diverges (since the partial sums alternate between 1 and 0 ), and the 
series 

1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + • 


diverges because the partial sums tend to infinity. 

We have already encountered series whose terms bi are functions of 
z of the form 

bi = CiX f 

with constant factors c*. Such series are called power series] they are 
limits of polynomials representing the partial sums 

Sn = Co + CiX + C2X^ + . . . + CnX” 


(the addition of the constant term Co requires an unessential change in 
the notation (2)). An expansion 

f(x) = Co + CiX + C2X^ + • • • 

of a function f(x) in a power series is thus a way of expressing an ap¬ 
proximation of f(x) by polynomials, the simplest functions. Sum¬ 
marizing and supplementing previous results, we list the following 


power series expansions: 


(4) 

^ — 1 — — 

1 +X ^ ^ 

valid for — 1 < x < +1 

(5) 

tan""^ 

valid for — 1 < x < +1 

(6) 

log (1 + *) = a: - ^ +1 - • • •, 

valid for — 1 < X < +1 

(7) 


valid for — 1 < x < + 1 

(8) 

rJ 

e =l + * + ^l + ^ + 4i+-*-. 

valid for all x. 


To this collection we now add the following important expansions: 


X X 

(9) sin » = a: — + ri “ • • •. valid for all x, 

ol 01 



474 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIII1 


2 4 

(10) cosx« ysA\d for all x. 

The proof is a simple consequence of the formulas (see p. 440) 


(a) 

J ain u du = 1 — cos x. 


f* 

(b) 

J cos udu — sin x. 


We start with the inequality 


cos X < 1. 

Integrating from 0 to x, where x is any fixed positive number, we find 
(see formula (13), p. 414) 

sin X < x; 

integrating this again. 


cosx < 


2' 


which is the same thing as 

( 

Integrating once more, we obtain 


cos ic > 1 — —. 


sin X > X 


X* _ _ X* 

^ 31 


Proceeding indefinitely in this manner, we get the two sets of inequalities 


sin ® ® 

. X* 

Binx >x — — 
o! 

• 'S. I 

•“*^*-31 + 61-71 


COS X < 1 

X* 

cos X > 1 — 
OOSX<1-| + ^, 


Now —» 0 as n tends to infinity. To show this we choose a 

fixed integer m such that x/m < i, and write c = For any 

integer n > m let us set n = m + r; then 



w+lw+2 w + r 


< c(i/, 





INFINITE SERIES OF FUNCTIONS 


476 


and as fi —» », r also —♦ « and hence cd)' —* 0. 

8 6 7 

sin = + ?— —+ • 

31^5! 7». 

- X* X® 


It follows that 


Since the terms, of the series are of alternating sign and decreasing 
magnitude (at least for | x | < 1), it follows that the error committed by 
breaking off either series at any term will not exceed in magnitude the value 
of the first term dropped. 

Remarks. These series can be used for the computation of tables. 
Example: What is sin 1°? 1® is tt/ISO in radian measure; hence 

T 

Wo 

The error committed by breaking off here is not greater than 

which is less than 0.000 000 000 02. Hence sin 1® = 0.017 452 406 4, to 
10 places of decimals. 

Finally, we mention without proof the ^‘binomial series*’ 

( 11 ) (1 + x)* = 1 + ax -j- C 2 X^ 4" C|X® 4“ • • • , 

where CJ is the “binomial coefficient” 




TT _ jr_1 / 

180 180 6 \ 


_ a{a - l)(a - 2) • • • (a - 5 4- 1) 

- — 


If a = w is a positive integer, then we have Cn = 1, and for s > n 
all the coefficients CJ in (11) are zero, so that we simply retain the finite 
formula of the ordinary binomial theorem. It was one of Newton’s 
great discoveries, made at the beginning of his career, that the element¬ 
ary binomial theorem can be extended from positive integral exponents 
n to arbitrary positive or negative, rational or irrational exponents a. 
When a is not an integer the right side of (11) yields an infinite series, 
valid for —1 < x < 4-1. For | x | > 1 the series (11) is divergent and 
thus the equality sign is meaningless. 

In particular, we find, by substituting a = J in (11), the expansion 


(12) Vl + x = l + ix-^jX* + 


2^3! 


x‘ - 


2 ^. 4 ! 




Like the other mathematicians of the eighteenth century, Newton did 
not give a real proof for the validity of his formula. A satisfactory 



476 


THE CALCULUS 


[ VIII1 


analysis of the convergence and range of validity of such infinite series 
was not given until the nineteenth century. 

Exercise: Write the power series for y/\ — x* and for l/y/\ — x. 

The expansions (4) — (11) are special cases of the general formula of 
Brook Taylor (1685-1731), which aims at expanding any one of a large 
class of functions /(a;) in the form of a power series, 

(13) /(x) = Co + cjx + cjx* + Cjx* + • • • , 

by finding a law that expresses the coefficients c,* in terms of the func¬ 
tion/and its derivatives. It is not possible here to give a precise proof 
of Taylor^s formula by formulating and establishing the conditions for 
its validity. But the following plausibility considerations will illuminate 
the interconnections of the relevant mathematical facts. 

Let us tentatively assume that an expansion (13) is possible. Let us 
further assume that can be differentiated, that /'(x) can be dif¬ 
ferentiated, and so on, so that the unending succession of derivatives 

/'(x),r(x),...,/'"’(x),... 

actually exists. Finally, we take as granted that an infinite power 
series may be differentiated term by term just like a finite polynomial. 
Under these assumptions, wo can determine the coefficients Cn from a 
knowledge of the behavior of /(x) in the neighborhood of x = 0. First, 
by substituting x = 0 in (13), we find 

Co = /(O), 

since all terms of the series containing x disappear. Now we differentiate 
(13) and obtain 

(130 /^(^) ~ Cl -f- 2C2X -f- SCaX^ 4“ • • • ”1" TlCnX^ ^ 4“ • • • . 

Again substituting x = 0, but this time in (13') and not in (13), we find 

Ci=/'(0). 

By differentiating (13) we obtain 

(13") /"(x) = 2 c2 4" 2*3»C3 X 4“ ••• 4* (w “ l)»7i*Cnx” * 4“ ••• \ 
then substituting x = 0 in (13"), we see that 

2! C2 = /"(O). 

Similarly, diff rentiating (13") and then substituting x = 0, 

31 c, = /'"(O), 



INFINITE SERIES OF FUNCTIONS 


477 


and by continuing this procedure, we get the general formula 

C = 

whereis the value of the nth derivative of f{x) at a: = 0. The 
result is the Taylor series 

(14) fix) = m + xf'iO) + ^/"(O) + + . • •. 


As an exercise in differentiation the reader may verify that, in examples 
(4)-(ll), the law of formation of the coefficients of a Taylor series is 
satisfied. 


2. Euler’s Formula, cos x + i sin x = 

One of the most fascinating results of Euler^s formalistic manipula¬ 
tions is an intimate connection in the domain of complex numbers 
between the sine and cosine functions on the one hand, and the ex¬ 
ponential function on the other. It should be stated in advance that 
Euler's ^^proof" and our subsequent argument have in no sense A rigorous 
character; they are typically eighteenth century examples of formal ma¬ 
nipulation. 

Let us start with De Moivre's formula proved in Chapter II, 

(cos rup i sin rup) = (cos ^ + i sin (pY. 

In this we substitute ip — x/n^ obtaining the formula 


(cos X + i sin x) = ( cos ~ + i sin ~ ) . 

\ n n/ 


X 

Now if X is given, then cos - will differ but slightly from cos 0 = 1 

n 

for large n; moreover, since 



^ A 

as-► 0 

n 


X X 

(see p. 307), we see that sin - is asymptotically equal to 
^ n n 

may therefore find it plausible to proceed to the limit formula 


(14) 


cos X + i sin a: = lim 



00 . 


We 



478 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIIII 


Comparing the right side of this equation with the formula (p. 449) 
e' = lim ^1 + aa n —> 00 , 

we have 

(15) cos a: + t sin * = c**, 

which is Euler’s result. 

We may obtain the same result in another formalistic way from the 
expansion of e‘, 

+ + + 


by substitutmg in it s = m;, a: being a real number. If we recall that 
the successive powers of i are i, — 1, —i, +1, and so on periodically, then 
by collecting real and imaginary parts we find 


0 " li + li “ 5i+•••)■'■ ~ it ^ 


comparing the right hand side with the series for sin x and cos x we 
again obtain Euler^s formula. 

Such reasoning is by no means an actual proof of the relation (15). 
The objection to our second argument is that the series expansion for 
6* was derived under the assumption that 2 is a real number; therefore 
the substitution z = ix requires justification. Likewise the validity of 
the first argument is destroyed by the fact that the formula 


e = lim (1 + z/ny as n —► 00 


was derived for real values of z only. 

To remove Euler's formula from the sphere of mere formalism to that 
of rigorous mathematical truth required the development of the theory 
of functions of a complex variable, one of the great mathematical 
achievements of the nineteenth century. Many other problems stimu¬ 
lated this far-reaching development. We have seen, for example, that 
the expansions of functions in power series converge for different x-inter- 
vals. Why do some expansions converge always, i.e. for all x, while 
others become meaningless for | x | > 1? 

Consider, for example, the geometrical series (4), page 473, which con¬ 
verges for 1 X I < 1. The left side of this equation is perfectly mean- 



£XJL£jR*S FORAlXJliAf cos x *4* ^ sin ^ *"* 


479 


ingful when x = 1, taking the value ~ ^ ^ 
right behaves most strangely, becoming 


1 

2' 


while the series on the 


1 - 1 + 1 - 1 + ••• . 


This series does not converge, since its partial sums oscillate between 1 
and 0. This indicates that functions may give rise to divergent series 
even when the functions themselves do not show any irregularity. Of 

course, the function ;—^— becomes infinite when x —► — 1. Since it 

1 + X 

can easily be shown that convergence of a power series for x = a > 0 
always implies convergence for — a < x < a, we might find an “explana¬ 
tion'* of the queer behavior of the expansion in the discontinuity of 


1 + X 
the series 


for X = —1. 


But the function 


1 

1 + X2 


may be expanded into 


1 + x^ 


= 1 


+ — X* + 


by substituting x^ for x in (4). This series will also converge for | x | <1, 
while for X = 1 it again leads to the divergent series l-l-fl — 
! + .••, and for | x | > 1 it diverges explosively, although the func¬ 
tion itself is everywhere regular. 

It has turned out that a complete explanation of such phenomena is 
possible only when the functions are studied for complex values of the 

variable x, as well as for real values. For example, the series for ——2 

1 “h X 

must diverge for x = f because the denominator of the fraction becomes 
zero. It follows that the series must also diverge for all x such that 
\x \ > \ i\ = 1, since it can be shown that its convergence for any 
such X would imply its convergence for x = i. Thus the question of 
the convergence of series, completely neglected in the early period of 
the calculus, became one of the main factors in the creation of the 
theory of functions of a complex variable. 


3. The Harmonic Series and the Zeta Function. Euler’s Product for 

the Sine 


Series whose terms are simple combinations of the integers are par¬ 
ticularly interesting. As an example we consider the “harmonic series" 

^234 ’ 


(16) 



480 


THE CALCULUS 


[VIII] 


which differs from that for log 2 by the signs of the even-numbered 
terms only. 

To ask whether this series converges is to ask whether the sequence 

I j • • • , 

where 

(17) fc = l + ' + l+...+l, 

tends to a finite limit. Although the terms of the series (16) approach 
0 as we go out farther and farther, it is easy to see that the series does 
not converge. For by taking enough terms we can exceed any positive 
number whatever, so that Sn increases without limit and hence the 
series (16) ‘‘diverges to infinity.^’ To see this we observe that 

= 1 + 

«4 = + (i + 4 ) > 52 + (i + i) = 1 + 

58 = 54 + (i + • • • + i) > 54 + (i + • • • + i) = 54 + i > 1 + 
and in general 


(18) 


52« > 1 + *2 • 


Thus, for example, the partial sums 52^ exceed 100 as soon as m > 200. 
Although the harmonic series does not converge, the series 


(19) 




may be shown to converge for any value of 5 greater than 1, and defines 
for all 5 > 1 the so-called zeta function, 

(20) r(8) = lim ^1 + i + ^ + + •' • + 08 n » , 

as a function of the variable 5 . There is an important relation between 
the zeta-function and the prime numbers, which we may derive by using 
our knowledge of the geometrical series. Let p = 2, 3, 5, 7, • • • be any 
prime; then for 5 > 1, 

° 

p* 


_i_i+i + l + l + 

1 - i/p* ^ p* ^ p** ^ p** ^ 


80 that 



HARMONIC SERIES AND ZETA FUNCTION 


481 


Let us multiply together these expressions for all the primes 
p = 2, 3, 5, 7, • • • without concerning ourselves with the validity of 
such an operation. On the left we obtain the infinite “product” 





= limit as n 


00 of 


1 

-1 - 1/pI 


1 - 1/pJ’ 


while on the other side we obtain the series 


1 + ^ + ^ + • • • = 

by virtue of the fact that every integer greater than 1 can be expressed 
uniquely as the product of powers of distinct primes. Thus we have 
represented the zeta-function as a product: 

(21) r(s) = (i _ i/ 2 *)(l - l/3*)(l - 1/5*) " ‘ ■ 

If there were but a finite number of distinct primes, say pi, p 2 , 
P 3 , • • • , Pr, then the product on the right side of (21) would be an 
ordinary finite product and would therefore have a finite value, even 
for s = 1. But as we have seen, the zeta series for s = 1 

f(l) = 1 + i + I + • • • 

diverges to infinity. This argument, which can easily be made into a rigor¬ 
ous proof, shows that there are infinitely many primes. Of course, this 
is much more involved and sophisticated than the proof given by Euclid 
(see p. 22). But it has the fascination of a difficult ascent of a mountain 
peak which could be reached from the other side by a comfortable road. 

Infinite products such as (21) are sometimes just as useful as infinite 
series for representing functions. Another infinite product, whose dis¬ 
covery was one more of Euler^s achievements, concerns the trigonometric 
function sin x. To understand this formula we start with a remark on 
polynomials. If f(x) = oq + aix + ••• + anx"" is a pol^momial of 
degree n and has n distinct zeros, xi, • • • , Xn, then it is known from 
algebra that/(x) can be decomposed into linear factors: 

Six) = an(x - Xi) • • - (x - Xn) 

(see p. 101). By factoring out the product XiX 2 * • -Xn we can write 

= ®('-1)0-s) 1:)' 



482 


THE CALCULUS 


I VIII) 


where C is a constant which, by setting x = 0, is recognized as C = Oo. 
Now, if instead of polynomials we consider more complicated functions 
f(x)^ the question arises whether a product decomposition by means of 
the zeros of f{x) is still possible. (In general, this cannot be true, as 
shown by the example of the exponential function which has no zeros at 
all, since e* 9 ^ 0 for every value of x.) Euler discovered that for the 
sine function such a decomposition is possible. To write the formula 
in the simplest way, we consider not sin x, but sin ttx. This function 
has the zeros x = 0, ±1, =t2, =fc3, ••• , since sin irn = 0 for all 
integers n and for no other numbers. Euler's formula now states that 

(22) sin T* = - |)(l - 1 ) • • • . 

This infinite product converges for all values of x, and is one of the most 
beautiful formulas in mathematics. For x = J it yields 

2 ^ 2 “ 2^)(^ “ ~ ‘ ‘ ' 

If we write 

1 _ (2n - l)(2n + 1) 

2*.n* 2n.2n ' 

we obtain Wallis’ product, 

T 22446688 
2 l'3’3‘5‘5’7‘7‘9 *’* ’ 

mentioned on page 300. 

For proofs of all these facts we must refer the reader to textbooks on 
the calculus (see also pp. 509-510). 

**§4. THE PRIME NUMBER THEOREM OBTAINED BY 
STATISTICAL METHODS 

When mathematical methods are applied to the study of natural 
phenomena one is usually satisfied with arguments in the course of 
which the chain of strict logical reasoning is interrupted by more or less 
plausible assumptions. Even in pure mathematics one encounters 
reasoning which, while it does not provide a rigorous proof, nevertheless 
suggests the correct solution and points the direction in which a rigorous 
proof may be sought. Bernoulli’s solution of the brachistochrone 
problem (see p. 383) has this character, as does most of the early work 
in analysis. 




PRIME NUMBER THEOREM 


483 


By a procedure typical of applied mathematics and particularly of 
statistical mechanics we shall here present an argument that at least 
makes plausible the truth of Gauss’s famous law of the distribution of 
the primes. (A related procedure was suggested to one of the authors 
by the experimental physicist Gustav Hertz.) This theorem, discussed 
empirically in the supplement to Chapter I, states that the number A (n) 
of primes not exceeding n is asymptotically equivalent to the quantity 
n/log n: 


A(n) 


n 

log n* 


By this is meant that the ratio of A(n) to n/log n tends to the limit 1 
as n tends to infinity. 

We start by making the assumption that there exists a mathematical 
law which describes the distribution of the primes in the following sense: 
for large values of n the function A(n) is approximately equal to the 

integral / W(x)dx, where W(x) is a function which measures the 
J2 

“density” of the primes. (We choose 2 as lower limit of the integral 
because for x < 2 clearly A(x) = 0.) More precisely, let x be a large 
number and Ax another large number but such that the order of mag¬ 
nitude of X is greater than that of Ax. (For example, we might agree 
to set Ax = \/x.) Then we are assuming that the distribution of the 
primes is so smooth that the number of primes in the interval from x 
to X + Ax is approximately equal to Tr(x)-Ax, and moreover that 

TF(x) as a function of x changes so slowly that the integral / W(x)dx 

J2 

may be replaced by a subsequent rectangular approximation without 
changing its asymptotic value. With these preliminary remarks we are 
ready to begin the argument. 

We have proved (p. 471) that for large integers log n! is asymptoti¬ 
cally equal to n*log n. 


log nl n.log n. 

Now we proceed by giving a second formula for log n! involving the 
primes and comparing the two expressions. Let us count how often 
an arbitrary prime p less than n is contained as a factor in the integer 
n! = 1. 2.3 • •. n. We shall denote by [a]p the largest integer k such 
that p* divides a. Since the prime decomposition of every integer is 



484 


THE CALCULUS 


I VIII) 


unique, it follows that [ab]p = [u]^, + [6]p for any two integers a and h. 
Hence 

[n!]p = [l]p + [2]p + [3]p+.-* + [n]p. 

The terms in the sequence 1, 2, 3, • • * , which are divisible by p* 
are p*, 2p*, 3p*', • • • ; their number Nk for large n is approximately 
n/p*. The number Mk of these terms which are divisible by p* and 
no higher power of p is equal to Nk — . Hence 

[nl]p = Ml -f- 2 M 2 ”h Sil/a “[“••• 

= (Ni - N 2 ) + 2(iVa - ATa) + 3(iV3 - N,) + .. 

= iVi + iV2 +JV8+... 

n , n , n , n 

= -- + -; + ~5 + ••• = - z • 

p p^ p* p — 1 

(These equalities are, of course, only approximate.) 

It follows that for large n the number n\ is given approximately by 

n 

the product of all the expressions p^"”^ for all primes p < n. Thus we 
have the formula 

log n! i log p. 

p<n P — 1 

Comparing this with our previous asymptotic relation for log n! we find, 
writing x instead of n, 

(I) 

P<* P 1 

The next and decisive step is to obtain an asymptotic expression in 
terms of W{x) for the right side of ( 1 ). When x is very large we may 
subdivide the interval from 2 to x = n into a large number r of large 
subintervals by choosing points 2 = { 1 , ( 2 , • • • , tr, ^r+i = x, with cor¬ 
responding increments . In each subinterval there 

may be primes, and all the primes in the ^th subinterval will have 
approximately the value . By our assumption on W{x) there are 
approximately primes in the^th subinterval; hence the sum 

on the right side of ( 1 ) is approximately equal to 

/-I Ki - 1 



PRIME NUMBER THEOREM 


485 


Replacing this finite sum by the integral which it approximates, we have 
as a plausible consequence of (1) the relation 

(2) loga:~ Tto 

J2 5 "" 1 

From this we shall determine the unknown function W(x), If we re¬ 
place the sign by ordinary equality and differentiate both sides with 
respect to x, then by the fundamental theorem of the calculus 


(3) 


X X — 1 


W(x) = 


X — 1 


X log X * 

We assumed at the beginning of our discussion that Aix) is approxi¬ 
mately equal to J W(x) dx\ hence A{x) is approximately given by the 
integral 


(4) 


r 


X — 1 

xlogx 


dx. 


In order to evaluate this integral we observe that the function 
f(x) = x/log X has the derivative 


logx (logx)2* 

For large values of x the two expressions 

J_^ _ l_ 

logx (logx)2’ logx xlogx 

are approximately equal, since for large x the second term in both cases 
will be much smaller than the first. Hence the integral (4) will be 
asymptotically equal to the integral 

since the integrands will be almost equal over most of the range of in¬ 
tegration. The term 2/log 2 can be neglected for large x since it is a 
constant, and thus we obtain the final result 


Aix) 


X 

logx' 


which is the prime number theorem. 



486 


THE CALCULUS 


IVIIIJ 


We cannot pretend that the preceding argument has more than a 
suggestive value. But on closer analysis the following fact emerges. 
It is not difficult to give a complete justification for all the steps that 
we have so boldly made; in particular, for equation (1), for the asymp¬ 
totic equivalence between this sum and the integral in (2), and for the 
step leading from (2) to (3). It is far more difficult to prove the existence 
of a smooth density function W{x), which we assumed at the beginning. 
Once we accept this, the evaluation of the function is a comparatively 
simple matter; from this point of view the proof of the existence of 
such a function is the central difficulty of the prime number problem. 



APPENDIX 

SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS, PROBLEMS, AND EXERCISES 

Many of the following problems are intended for the somewhat ad¬ 
vanced reader. They are designed not so much to develop routine 
technique as to stimulate inventive ability. 

Arithmetic and Algebra 

(1) How do we know that 3 does not divide any power of 10, as 
stated on page 61? (See p. 47.) 

(2) Prove that the principle of the smallest integer is a consequence 
of the theorem of mathematical induction. (See p. 19.) 

(3) By the binomial theorem applied to the expansion of (1 + 1)", 
show that Co ■!* C" -b C? -b • • • "b CU — 2". 

(*4) Take any integer, z = dhc • • • , form the sum of its digits, 
o -b h + c -b • • • , subtract this from z, cross out any one digit from 
the result, and denote the sum of the remaining digits by w. From a 
knowledge of vn alone, can a rule be found for determining the value 
of the digit crossed out? (There will be one ambiguous case, when 
w = 0.) Like many other simple facts about congruences, this can be 
used as the basis for a parlor trick. 

(6) An arithmetical progression of first order is a sequence of numbers, 
a, a -b d, o -b 2d, a -b 3d, • • • , such that the difference between suc¬ 
cessive members of the sequence is a constant. An arithmetical pro¬ 
gression of second order is a sequence of numbers, Oi, oj, aa, • • • such 
that the differences Ci+i — Oi form an arithmetical progression of first 
order. Similarly, an arithmetical progression of fcth order is a sequence 
such that the differences form an arithmetical progression of order 
A: — 1, Prove that the squares of the integers form an arithmetical 
progression of second order, and prove by induction that the A;th powers 
of the integers form an arithmetical progression of order k. Prove that 
any sequence whose rath term, a., is given by the expression co -b cira -b 
cjra* + ... -b c»ra*, where the c’s are constants, is an arithmetical pro¬ 
gression of order k. *Prove the converse of this statement for k = 2; 
k = 3; for general k. 


487 



488 


APPENDIX 


(6) Prove that the sum of the first n terms of an arithmetical progres¬ 
sion of order k is an arithmetical progression of order A + 1. 

(7) How many divisors has 10,296? (See p. 25.) 

(8) From the algebraic formula (a^ + + (f) = (oc — hdf -f 

{ad + 6c)®, prove by induction that any integer r = aiOa • • • an, where 
all the a^s are sums of two squares, is itself a sum of two squares. Check 
this with 2=1® + !*, 5 = 1® + 2®, 8 = 2® + 2®, etc. for r = 160, 
r = 1600, r = 1300, r = 625. If possible, give several different repre¬ 
sentations of these numbers as sums of two squares. 

(9) Apply the result of Exercise 8 to construct new Pythagorean 
number triples from given ones. 

(10) Set up rules for divisibility similar to those on page 35 for number 
systems with the bases 7, 11, 12. 

(11) Show that for two positive rational numbers, r = a/6 and 
B ~ c/d, the inequality r > s is equivalent to oc — 6d > 0. 

(12) Show that for positive r and s, with r < s, we always have 

r <'-+-*< . M.d < 2,, < (r + 

(13) If z is any complex number, prove by induction that z"^ + l/z"* 
can be expressed as a polynomial of degree n in the quantity w ^ z + ljz, 
(See p. 100.) 

(*14) Introducing the abbreviation cos ^ + i sin ^ = £^(^), we have 
l£?(v?)l”* = Einup), Use this and the formulas of page 13 on geometrical 
series, which remain correct for complex quantities, in order to prove 
that 


cos ^ — cos (n + i)(p 

sin ^ + sin 2v? + sin 3v? + • • • + sin n(p = - 

28in| 


J + cos ^ + cos 2v> + cos 3v» + • • • + cos = 


sin (n + i)(/ > 
2 sin 


(16) Find what the formula of Exercise 3 on page 18 yields, if we sub¬ 
stitute q = 


Analytic Geometry 

A careful study of the following exercises, supplemented by drawings 
and numerical examples, will help in mastering the elements of analytic 



ANALYTIC GEOMETRY 


489 


geometry. The definitions and simplest facts of trigonometry are 
presupposed. 

It will often be useful to think of a line or a segment as being directed 
from one of its points toward another. By the directed line PQ (or 
the directed segment PQ) we shall mean the line (or segment) having 
the direction from P toward Q. In the absence of explicit specification 
a directed line I will be supposed to have a fixed but arbitrary direction; 
except that the directed x-axis will be taken to be directed from 0 
toward a point on it with positive x-coordinate, and similarly for the 
directed 2 /-axis. Directed lines (or directed segments) will then be said 
to be parallel if and only if they have the same direction. The direction 
of a directed segment on a directed line can be indicated by attaching 
a plus or a minus sign to the distance between the endpoints of the 
segment, according as the segment has the same direction as the line 
or the opposite direction. It will be desirable to extend the terminology 
‘^segment PQ^^ to the case in which P and Q coincide; to such a “seg- 
ment^^ we must clearly assign length zero, but no direction. 

(16) Prove: If Pi(xi, yO and P 2 (x 2 , 2 / 2 ) are any two points, the co¬ 
ordinates of the midpoint, Po (xq , 2 / 0 ), of the segment P 1 P 2 are Xo = 
(xi + X 2 )/ 2 , 2/0 = ( 2/1 + 2 / 2 ) 72 . More generally, show that, if Pi and 
Pi are distinct, then the point Po on the directed line P 1 P 2 for which 
the ratio PiPo:PiP 2 of the directed lengths has the value fc, has the 
coordinates 

Xo = (1 — k)xi + kXi , 2/0 = (1 — k)j/i + kt /2 • 

(Hint: Parallel lines cut two transversals in proportional segments.) 

Thus the points on the line P 1 P 2 have coordinates of the form 
X = XiXi + X 2 X 2 , 2 / = ^i2/i + ^ 2 ^ 2 , with Xi + X 2 = L The values 
Xi = 1 and Xi = 0 characterize the points Pi and P 2 respectively. Nega¬ 
tive values of Xi characterize points beyond P 2 , and negative values 
of X 2 characterize points before Pi. 

(17) Characterize the position of points on the line in a similar man¬ 
ner by means of the values of fc. 

It is just as important to use positive and negative numbers to indi¬ 
cate the directions of rotations as of distances. By definition, the 
direction of rotation that brings the directed x-axis into coincidence 
with the directed y-axis after a rotation of 90® is taken as positive. In 
the usual coordinate system, with the positive x-axis directed to the 
right and the positive 2 /-axis upward, this is the counterclockwise sense 
of rotation. We now define the angle from a directed line h to a di- 



490 


APPENDIX 


rected line U as the angle through which h must be rotated in order to 
become parallel to Ii. Of course, this angle is determined only up to 
integral multiples of a complete revolution of 360*. Thus the angle 
from the directed x-axis to the directed y-axis is 90* or —270*, etc. 

(18) If a is the angle from the directed x-axis to the directed line I, 
if Pi, Pt are any two points on I, and if d denotes the directed distance 
from Pi to P», show that 

cos a “ — . , sin « = , (xi — xi) sin a = (yj — yO cos «. 

a a 

If the line I is not perpendicular to the x-axis, the ahpe of I is de¬ 
fined as 

m = tan a = ^ - — . 

Xi - Xi 

The value of m does not depend on the choice of direction on the 
line, since tan a = tan (a 180*), or, equivalently, (yi — yj)/ 
(xi - X*) = (yj - yi)/(x» - Xi). 

(19) Prove: The slope of a line is zero, positive, or negative, accord¬ 
ing as a parallel to it through the origin lies on the x-axis, in the first 
and third quadrants, or in the second and fourth quadrants, 
respectively. 

We distinguish a positive and a negative side of a directed line I as 
follows. Let P be any point not on I, and let Q be the foot of the 
perpendicular to I through P. Then P is on the positive or negative 
side of I according as the angle from I to the directed line QP is 90° 
or -90*. 

We shall now determine the equation of a directed line 1. We draw 
through the origin 0 a line m perpendicular to I, and direct m so that 
the angle from it to 1 is 90*. The angle from the directed x-axis to m 
will be called Then a = 90* -f /J, sin a = cos 0 , cos a = —sin j3. 
Let R with coordinates xj, yi be the point where m meets I. We shall 
denote by d the directed distance OR on directed m. 

(20) Show that d is positive if and only if 0 lies on the negative side 
of 1 . 

We have Xi = d cos /3, yi = d sin 0 (compare Ex. 18). Hence, 
(x — Xi) sin a = (y — yi) cos a, or (x — d cos |3) cos |3 = — (y — d sin 0) 
sin 0, wluch ^ves the equation 


X cos d -f- w sin |3 — d = 0. 



ANALYTIC GEOMETRY 


491 


This is the normal form of the equation of the line I. Note that this 
equation does not depend on the direction assigned to I, for a change 
in direction would change the sign of every term on the left side, and 
hence would leave the equation unchanged. 

By multiplying the normal equation with an arbitrary factor, we ob¬ 
tain the general form of the equation of the line: 

ax + by + c = 0. 

To retrieve from this general form the geometrically significant normal 
form we must multiply by a factor which will reduce the first two co¬ 
efficients to cos p and sin whose squares add up to 1. This may be 
done by the factor l/\/a2 + which yields the normal form 

^ I ^ t c A 

■y/a? + 6^ Vo’* + 6** Vo’* + 6’* 

so that we have 

o a b . . c . 

Vo* + 6* Vo* + b* Vo* + b* 

(21) Show: (a) that the only factors that will reduce the general 

form to the normal form are + b^ —lly/a^ + b^; (b) that 

the choice of the one or the other of these factors determines which 
direction is assigned to the line; and (c) that, when one of these factors 
has been used, the origin is on the positive or negative side of the result¬ 
ing directed line, or is on the line, according as d is negative, positive, 
or zero. 

(22) Prove directly that the line with slope m through a given point 
Po{xo , yo) is given by the equation 

y yo = m{x — xo), or y = mx + t/o — mxo. 

Prove that the line through two given points, Pi(xi, yi), Pzixt , y*), 
has an equation 

(2/2 - yi)(x ~ xi) = (X2 - Xi){y - 2 /i). 

The x-co5rdinate of a point in which a line or curve cuts the x-axis 
is called an x-intercept of the curve; similarly for y-intercepL 

(23) By dividing the general equation of Exercise 20 by an appropriate 



492 


APPENDIX 


factor, show that the equation of a line may be written in the intercept 
form, 



where a and h are the x- and ^-intercepts. What exceptions are there? 

(24) By a similar procedure show that the equation of a line not 
parallel to the ^-axis may be written in the slope-intercept form, 

y = mz + b. 

(If the line is parallel to the 2 /-axis, its equation may be written as 
z = a.) 

(25) Let az + by + c = 0 and a'z + b'y + c' = 0 be equations of 

undirected lines I and Z', with slopes m and m' respectively. Show that 
Z and V are parallel or perpendicular according as: (a) m = m' or 
mm' = —1. (b) a6' — a'6 = 0 or aa' + bb' = 0. (Note that (b) 

holds even when a line has no slope, i.e. is parallel to the y-axis.) 

(26) Show that the equation of a line through a given point Po(xo, t/o) 
and parallel to a given line Z with equation ax + 62 / + c = 0 has the 
equation ax + Z> 2 / = 0 x 0 + by ^. Show that a similar formula, bz — ay = 
bzo — ayo , holds for the equation of the line through Po and perpen¬ 
dicular to Z. (Note that if the equation of Z is in the normal form, so 
also will the new equation be, in each case.) 

(27) Let z cos P + y sin p — d = 0 and ox + 62 / + c = 0 be the 
normal and general forms of the equation of a line Z. Show that the 
directed distance h from Z to any point Q(a, v) is given by 

h = u cos 0 + V sin P — d, 


or by 


, au + hv + c 

ft - - , 

=fc\/ a* + b^ 

and that h is positive or negative according as Q is on the positive or 
negative side of the directed line Z (the direction having been determined 
by /3, or by the choice of the sign before + b-). (Hint: Write the 
normal form of the equation of the line m through Q parallel to Z, and 
find the distance from Z to m.) 

(28) Let Z(x, ^) = 0 represent the equation ax + 6t/ + c = 0 of a 
line 1; similarly for Z'(x, y) = 0. Let X and X' be constants, with 



ANALYTIC GEOMETRY 


493 


X + X' = 1. Show that, if I and V intersect in Po(xo, yo), then every 
line through Po has an equation 

y) + y) = 0, 

and conversely; and that every such line is uniquely determined by the 
choice of a pair of values for X and X'. (Hint: Po lies on I if and only 
if , yo) = oxq + 6yo + c = 0.) What lines are represented if I 
and V are parallel? Note that the condition X + X' = 1 is unnecessary, 
but serves to determine a unique equation for each line through Po. 

(29) Use the result of the previous exercise to find the equation of a 
line through the intersection Po of I and V and through another point, 
Pi{^\ y yO) without finding the coordinates of Po. (Hint: Find X and 
X' from the conditions Xi(xi, yi) + X'Z'(xi, yi) = 0, X + X' = 1.) Check 
by finding the coordinates of Po (see pp. 76-77) and showing that 
Po lies on the line whose equation you have found. 

(30) Prove that the equations of the bisectors of the angles formed 
by intersecting lines I and V are 

Va'^ + Z(x, y) = ±\/a^ + V{x, y). 

(Hint: See Ex. 27.) What do these equations represent if I and V 
are parallel? 

(31) Find the equation of the perpendicular bisector of the segment 

P 1 P 2 by each of the following methods: (a) Find the equation of line 
P 1 P 2 ; find the coordinates of the midpoint Po of segment P 1 P 2 ; find 
the equation of the line through Po perpendicular to P 1 P 2 . (b) Write 

the equation expressing the fact that the distance (p. 74) between Pi 
and any point P(x, y) on the perpendicular bisector is equal to the 
distance between P 2 and P; square both sides of the equation and 
simplify. 

(32) Find the equation of the circle through three non-collinear 

points, Pi, P 2 , P 3 , by each of the following methods: (a) Find the 
equation of the bisectors of the segments P 1 P 2 and P 2 P 3 ; find the co¬ 
ordinates of the center as the point of intersection of these lines; find 
the radius as the distance between the center and Pi. (b) The equa 

tion must be of the form + y* — 2ax — 2hy = k (see p. 74). Since 
each of the given points lies on the circle we must have 

+ yi - 2axi - 2hyi = fc, 
x\ + y\ - 2 ax 2 - 2 by 2 = k, 
x\ + yl - 2axz - 2byt = k, 



494 


APPENDIX 


for a point lies on a curve if and only if its coordinates satisfy the equa¬ 
tion of the curve.; Solve these simultaneous equations for a, b, k. 

(33) To find the equation of the ellipse with major axis 2p, minor 
axis 2q, and foci at F(e, 0) and F(—e, 0), where c* = p* — q*, use the 
distances r and r' from F and F' to any point on the curve. By defini¬ 
tion of the ellipse, r -|- r' = 2p. By using the distance formula on 
page 74, show that 

r'* + ef — (x — e)* = 4ex. 

Since 

r** — r’‘ = (r' + r)(r' — r) — 2p(r' — r), 

show that r' — r = 2«x/p. Solve this relation and r' -f r = 2p to 
find the important formulas 


r = --X + P, 
V 


r' = - X •+• p. 
V 

j _ /- 


Since (again by the distance formula) r = (x — c) + y , equate this 
expression for r’ to the expression p) above, 

(x - eY + y* = X + p^ . 


Expand, collect terms, substitute p* — for e*, and simplify. Show 
that the result may be expressed in the form 



Carry out the same procedure for the hyperbola, defined as the 
locus of all points P for which the absolute value of the difference 
r — r' is equal to a given quantity 2p. Here e* = p* -b g*. 

(34) The parabola is defined as the locus of a point whose distance 
from a fixed line (the directrix) is equal to its distance from a fixed 
point (the focus). If we choose the line x = —a as directrix and 
the point F{a, 0) as focus, show that the equation of the parabola may 
be written in the form y* = 4ox. 


Geometrical Constructions 

(36) Prove the impossibility of constructing with ruler and compass 
the numbers -^3, Prove that the construction of •^o 



GEOMETRICAL CONSTRUCTIONS 


495 


is only possible if o is the cube of a rational number. (See p. 134, £f.) 

(36) Find the sides of the regular 3*2’*-gon and of the 5-2"-gon and 
characterize the corresponding sequences of extension fields. 

(37) Prove the impossibility of trisecting with ruler and compass an 
angle of 120 or 30 degrees. (Hint for the case of 30®: The equation to 
be discussed is 42* — 32 = cos 30® = i-y/S. Introduce a new unknown, 
u = z-\/3, and obtain an equation for 2 from which the non-constructi- 
bility of 2 follows as in the text, p. 139.) 

(38) Prove that the regular 9-gon is not constructible. 

(39) Prove that the inversion of a point Fix, y) into the point P\x', y') 
in the circle with the radius r about the origin is given by the equations 

’ y X^ + y^‘ 

Find algebraically the equations giving x, y in terms of x', y'. 

(*40) Prove analytically by using Exercise 39 that by inversion the 
totality of circles and straight lines is transformed into itself. Check 
the properties a) - d) on page 142 separately, and likewise the trans¬ 
formations corresponding to Figure 61. 

(41) What becomes of the two families of lines, x == const, and 
y = const., parallel to the coordinate axes, after inversion in the unit 
circle about the origin? Find the answer without and with analytic 
geometry. (See p. 160.) 

(42) Carry out the Apollonius constructions in simple cases of your 
own selection. Try the solution analytically according to the method 
of page 125. 


Projective and Non-Euclidean Geometry 

(43) Find all the values of the cross ratio X of four harmonic points, 
if the points are subjected to permutations. (Answer: X = —1, 2, i). 

(44) For what configurations of four points do some of the six values 
of the cross-ratio on page 176 coincide? (Answer: Only for X = — 1 
or X = 1; there is also one imaginary value of X for which X = 1/(1 — X), 
the ‘‘equianharmonic’’ cross-ratio.) 

(45) Show that a cross-ratio (ABCD) = 1 means coincidence of the 
points C and D, 

(46) Prove the statements about the cross-ratio of planes, page 176. 

(47) Prove that if P and P' are inverse with respect to a circle and 
if the diameter AB is collinear with P, P'. then the points A, B, P, P' 



496 


APPENDIX 


form a harmonic quadruple. (Hint: Use the analytic expression (2) 
on p. 178, take the circle as the unit circle and as the axis.) 

(48) Find the coordinates of the fourth harmonic point to three points 
Pit Ptt Pz- What happens if Pz moves to the midpoint of P 1 P 2 ? 
(See p. 178.) 

(*49) Use Dandelin^s spheres to develop the theory of conic sections. 
In particular prove that they are all (except for the circle) geometrical 
loci of points whose distances from a fixed point F and a fixed line I 
have a constant ratio k. For A; > 1 we have a hyperbola, for A; = 1 a 
parabola, for A; < 1 an ellipse. The line I is obtained by intersecting 
the plane of the conic with the plane through the circle in which the 
Dandelin sphere touches the cone. (Since the circle does not come under 
this characterization except as a limiting case, it is not entirely ap¬ 
propriate to choose this property as a definition of the conics, although 
this is sometimes done.) 

(50) Discuss: conic, regarded as both a set of points and a set 

of lines, is self-dual.^^ (See p. 209.) 

(*51) Try to prove Desargues^s theorem in the plane by carrying out 
the passage to the limit from the three-diniensional configuration of 
Figure 73. (See p. 172.) 

(*52) How many lines intersecting four given skew lines can be 
drawn? How can they be characterized? (Hint: Draw a hyperboloid 
through three of the given lines, see p. 212.) 

(*53) If the Poincar4 circle is the unit circle of the complex plane, 
then two points Zi and zz and the z-values ti;i, of the two points of 
intersection of the ‘‘straight line” through these two points with the 

unit circle define a cross-ratio - -- — which, according to 

Zi Wz Z2 — Wz 

Exercise 8 on page 97, is real. Its logarithm is by definition the hy¬ 
perbolic distance between Zi and zt. 

(*54) By an inversion transform the Poincard circle into the upper 
half plane. Develop the Poincar4 model and its properties for this 
half plane directly and by means of this inversion. (See p. 224.) 

Topology 

(65) Verify Euler's formula for the five regular polyhedra and for 
other polyhedra. Carry out the corresponding network reductions. 

(66) In the proof of Euler's formula (p. 239) we are required to re¬ 
duce any plane network of triangles, by successive application of two 
fundamental operations, to a network consisting of a single triangle, for 



TOPOLOGY 


497 


which y — ^ + F = 3 — 3 + 1 = 1. How can we be sure that the 
final result will not be a pair of triangles with no vertices in common, 
so that F--£ + f = 6 — 6 + 2 = 2? (Hint: We can assume that 
the original network is connected^ i.e. that one can pass from any vertex 
to any other along edges of the network. Show that this property 
cannot be destroyed by the two fundamental operations.) 

(57) We have admitted only two fundamental operations in the reduc¬ 
tion of the network. Might it not happen at some stage that a triangle 
appears having only one vertex in common with the other triangles of 
the network? (Construct an example.) This would require a third 
operation: Removal of two vertices, three edges, and a face. Would 
this affect the proof? 

(58) Can a wide rubber band be wrapped three times around a broom¬ 
stick so as to lie flat (i.e. untwisted) on the broomstick? (Of course, the 
rubber band must cross itself somewhere.) 

(59) Show that a circular disk from which the point at the center 
has been removed admits a continuous, fixed-point-free transformation 
into itself. 

(*60) The transformation which shifts each point of a disk one unit 
in a fixed direction obviously has no fixed points. Of course, this is 
not a transformation of the disk into itself^ since some points will be 
taken into points outside the disk. Why does not the argument of 
page 255, based on the transformation P —> P*, hold in this case? 

(61) Suppose we have a rubber inner tube, the inside of which is 
painted white and the outside black. Is it possible, by cutting a small 
hole, deforming the tube, and then sealing up the hole, to turn the tube 
inside out, so that the inside will be black and the outside white? 

(*62) Show that there is no ^Tour color problem” in three dimensions 
by proving that for any desired number n, n bodies can be placed in 
space so that each touches all the others. 

(*63) Using either an actual torus surface (inner tube, anchor ring) 
or a plane region with boundary identification (Fig. 143), construct a 
map consisting of seven regions, each of which touches all the others. 
(See p. 248.) 

(64) The 4-dimensional tetrahedron of Figure 118 consists of five 
points, a, 6, c, d, e, each of which is joined to the other four. Even if 
the connecting lines are allowed to be curved, the figure cannot be 
drawn in the plane in such a way that no two of the connections cross. 
Another configuration, containing ten connections, that cannot be drawn 
in the plane without crossings consists of six points, a, 6, c, a', 6', c', 



498 


APPENDIX 


such that each of the points a, b, c, is connected to each of the points 
o', b', c'. Verify these facts by experiment, * and try to devise a proof, 
using the Jordan curve theorem as a basis. (It has been proved that 
any configuration of points and lines that cannot be represented in the 
plane without crossings must contain one of these two configurations 
as a part.) 

(65) A configuration is formed by taking the six sides of a 3-dimen¬ 
sional tetrahedron and adding one line joining the midpoints of two 
opposite sides. (Two sides of a tetrahedron are opposite if they have 
no common endpoint.) Show that this configuration is equivalent to 
one described in the preceding exercise. 

(*66) Let p, g, r be the three tips of the symbol E. The symbol is 
shifted some distance away, giving another E, with tips p', q', r'. Can 
one join p to p', q to g', and r to r' by three curves which do not cross 
each other or the E's? 

If we go around a square, we change our direction four times, each 
time by an amount 90°, giving a total change of A =: 360°. If we go 
around a triangle, it is known from elementary geometry that A = 360°. 

(67) Prove that if C is any simple closed polygon, then A = 360°. 

(Hint: Cut the interior of C into triangles, then remove boundary 
segments, as on p. 239. Let the successive boundaries be Bi, Bt, 
jB» , • • • , . Then Bi = C, and 5* is a triangle. Show that, if A< 

corresponds to Bi, then A< = Ai-i.) 

(*68) Let C be any simple closed curve with a continuously turning 
tangent vector. If A denotes the total change in the angle of the tangent 
as we traverse the curve once, show that here also A = 360°. (Hint: 
Let po, Pi, Pi, • * • , Pit, Po be points cutting C into small, nearly 
straight segments. Let Ci be the curve with the segments popi, pipi, 
... , p,_ipj , and the original arcs p<p<+i, • • • , PnPo . Then Co = C, 
and Cn is composed of line segments. Show that At = Ai+i, and use 
the result of the preceding exercise). Does this apply to the hypocy- 
cloid of Figure 55? 

(68) Show that if in the diagram of the Klein bottle on page 263 all 
four arrows are drawn clockwise, a surface is formed that is equivalent 
to a sphere with one disk replaced by a cross-cap. (This surface is 
topologically equivalent to the extended plane of projective geometry.) 

(70) The Klein bottle of Figure 142 may be cut into two ssunmetrical 
halves by a plane. Show that the result consists of two Moebius strips. 

(*71) In the Moebius strip of Figure 139 the two endpoints of each 



TOPOLOGY 


499 


transversal segment are identified. Show that the result is topolo^cally 
equivalent to a Klein bottle. 

All possible ordered pairs of points on a line segment (the two points 
coinciding or not) form a square, in the following sense. If the points 
of the segment are designated by their distances x, y from one end A, 
the ordered pairs of numbers (x, y) may be regarded as the Cartesian 
codrdinates of a point of the square. 

All possible pairs of points without regard to order (i.e. with (x, y) 
regarded as the same as {y, x)) form a surface S which is topologically 
equivalent to a square. To see this choose that representation which 
has the first point nearest the end A of the segment, if x 9 ^ y. Thus 5 
is the set of all pairs (i, y) where either x is less than yoTx = y. Using 
Cartesian coordinates, this gives the triangle in the plane with vertices 
(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 1). 

(*72) What surface is formed by the set of all ordered pairs of points 
of which the first belongs to a line and the second to the circumference 
of a circle? (Answer: A cylinder.) 

(73) What surface is formed by the set of all ordered pairs of points 
on a circle? (Answer: A torus.) 

(*74) What surface is formed by the set of all unordered pairs of 
points on a circle? (Answer: A Moebius strip.) 

(75) Here are the rules of a game, played with pennies on a large 
circular table: A and B in turn place pennies on the table. The pennies 
need not touch each other, and a penny may be placed anywhere on 
the table, so long as it does not extend over the edge or overlap a penny 
already on the table. Once placed, a penny may not be moved. In 
time, the table will be covered with pennies in such a way that no space 
large enough for another penny remains. The player who is able to 
place the last penny on the table wins. If A plays first, prove that no 
matter how B plays, A can be sure of winning, provided that he plays 
correctly. 

(76) If, in the game of Exercise 75 the table has the form of Figure 
125, b, prove that B can always win. 

Functions, Limits and Continuity 

(77) Find the continued fraction expansion for the ratio OB’.AB 

of page 123. _ 

(78) Show that the sequence Oo = V^, o„+i = -s/2 + a„ is mono- 



500 


APPENDIX 


tone increasing, bounded by B = 2, and hence has a limit. Show that 
this limit must be the number 2. (See pp. 125 and 326.) 

(*79) Try to prove, by methods similar to those used on pages 318 
and following, that given any smooth closed curve, a square may always 
be drawn whose sides are tangent to the curve. 

The function u = f{x) is called convex if the midpoint of the segment 
joining any two points of the graph of the function lies above the graph. 
For example, « = e* (Fig. 278) is convex, while m = log x (Fig. 277) is 
not. 

(80) Prove that the function u = /(x) is convex if, and only if, 

/(a:i) + /(xj) ^ t (xi-\- x*'\ 

2 -^\ 2 /’ 
with equality only for Xi = xj. 

(♦81) Prove that for convex functions the more general inequality 
Xi/(Xi) + \if(Xi) > /(XiXi + XiX*) 

holds, where Xi, Xj are any two constants such that Xi + Xj = 1 and 
Xi > 0, Xj > 0. This is equivalent to the statement that no point 
of the segment joining two points of the graph lies below the graph. 

(82) Using the condition of Exercise 80 prove that the functions 
u = ■\/l + x^ and u = 1/x (for x > 0) are convex, i.e. that 

• y/l + X? + Vl + x| ^ ^ Xi + Xj J 

s f - + i ^— for positive Xi and x*. 

2 \Xl Xj/ Xl + X2 

(83) The same for m = x’, m = x” for x > 0, w = sin x for t < x < 2 t, 
u = tan X for 0 < X < ir/2, w = —y/l — x* for | x | < 1. 

Maxima and Minima 

(84) Find the path of shortest length between P and Q as in Figure 
178, if the path is supposed to meet the two given lines alternately n 
times. (See p. 333.) 

(85) Find the shortest connection between two points P and Q within 
a triangle with acute angles if the path is required to meet the sides of 
the triangle in a given order. (See p. 334.) 

(86) Draw the level lines and check the existence of at least two saddle 
points in a surface over a triply connected domain whose boundary is 
on the same level. (See p. 345.) Again we must exclude the case 



MAXIMA. AND MINIMA 


501 


where the tangent plane to the surface is horizontal along a whole 
closed curve. 

(87) Starting with two arbitrary po sitiv e rational numbers, a and b, 
form, step by step, the pairs an+i = Va^bn , 6 n+i = i(ctn + bn). Prove 
that they define a sequence of nested intervals. (The limit point as 
n —► 00 , the so-called arithmetical-geometrical mean of oo and bo, 
played a great rdle in the early researches of Gauss). 

( 88 ) Find the length of the whole graph in Figure 219, and compare 
this with the total length of the two diagonals. 

(*89) Investigate conditions on four points, , A?, As, A 4 , that 
show whether they lead to the case of Figure 216 or 218. 

(*90) Find systems of five points for which different street nets 
satisfying the angular conditions exist. Only some of them will yield 
relative minima. (See p. 361.) 

(91) Prove Schwarz’s inequality, 

(aibi + • • • + anbn)* < (a? + ... + a\){b\ + • •. + b*), 

valid for any set of pairs of numbers a,*, b, ; prove that the inequality 
sign holds only if the a< are proportional to the b,. (Hint: Generalize 
the algebraic formula of Ex. 8 .) 

(*92) With n positive numbers Zi, * • • , Xn we form the expressions 
Sk defined by 

Sk = {X 1 X 2 • • • Xk + • • •)/Ck y 

where the symbol “+ •••” means that all the C? products of com¬ 
binations of k of these quantities are to be added. Then prove that 


< Vskf 


where the equality sign holds only if all the quantities Xi are equal. 

(93) For n = 3 these inequalities state liiat for three positive numbers 
a, b, c 




a -f b + c 
3 


What extremal properties of the cube are implied by these inequalities? 

(*94) Find an arc of a curve of shortest length joining two points 
Ay B and including with the segment AB a prescribed area. (Answer: 
The arc must be circular.) 

(*95) Given two segments AB and A'B'y find an arc joining A to B 
and one joining A' to .B' such that the two arcs include with the two 



S02 


APPENDIX 


segments a prescribed area and have a minimum total length. (Answer: 
The arcs are circular with the same radius.) 

(♦96) The same for any number of segments, AB, A'B', etc. 

(♦97) On two lines intersecting at 0 find two points A and B, re¬ 
spectively, and join A with B by an arc of minimal length such that 
the area included by it and the lines is prescribed. (Answer: The arc 
is circular and perpendicular to the lines.) 

(♦98) The same problem, but now the total perimeter of the domain 
included, i.e. the arc plus OA plus OB is to be a minimum. (Answer: 
The solution is given by an arc of a circle which bulges outward and 
touches the two lines.) 

(♦99) The same problem for several angular sectors. 

(♦100) Prove that the nearly plane surfaces in Figure 240 are not 
plane except for the stabilizing surface in the center. Remark: To 
find or characterize these curved surfaces analytically is a challenging 
unsolved problem. The same is true for the surfaces in Figure 251. 
In Figure 268 we actually have twelve symmetric planes meeting at 
120^ in the diagonals. 

Advice for some additional soap film experiments. Carry out experi¬ 
ments indicated by Figures 256 and 257 for more than three connecting 
rods. Study the limiting cases for volume of air tending to zero. Ex¬ 
periment with non-parallel planes or other surfaces. Blow up the cubic 
bubble of Figure 258 until it fills the whole cube and bulges over the 
edges. Then suck the air out again, reversing the process. 

(♦101) Find two equilateral triangles with given total perimeter and 
minimum area. (Answer: The triangles must be congruent (use cal¬ 
culus).) 

♦(102) Find two triangles with given total perimeter and maximum 
area. (Answer: One triangle degenerates into a point; the other one 
must be equilateral.) 

♦(103) Find two triangles with given total area and minimum perim¬ 
eter. 

(♦104) Find two equilateral triangles with given total area and maxi¬ 
mum perimeter. 


The Calculus 

(105) Differentiate the functions Vl + x , \/l + , A/ —by 

y X — i 

applying directly the definition of derivative, forming and transforming 
the difference quotient until the limit can be obtained easily by sub¬ 
stituting Xi = X. (Sec p. 421.) 



THE CALCULUS 


603 


(106) Prove that the function y — with y = 0 for a; = 0, has 
all its derivatives zero at x >= 0. 

(107) Show that the function of Sxercise 106 cannot be expanded in 
a Taylor series. (See p. 477.) 

(108) Find the points of inflection (/"(x) = 0) of the curves y = e~** 
and y = xe~** 

(109) Prove that for a polynomial /(x) with all n roots Xi, • • • ,x, 
distinct we have 

® - ± 1 
/(x) * — Xj 

*(110) Using the direct definition of the integral as limit of a sum, 
prove that for n —♦ <» we have 

nf-J— + -J_ + ... + 

VU + «* 2* + n* ^ n* + nV 4' 

(♦111) Prove in a similar way that 

6 / . 6 , . 26 . . ‘ w6\ , - 

- ( sm - + sin-h • • • + sin — ) —► cos 6 — 1. 

n\ n n n/ 

(112) By drawing Figure 276 in large scale on coordinate paper and 
counting the small squares in the shaded area, find an approximate 
value for t. 

(113) Use formula (7), page 441 for the numerical calculation of t 
with a guaranteed accuracy of at least 1/100. 

(114) Prove: c'* = — 1. (Seep. 478.) 

(115) A curve of given shape is expanded in the ratio l:z, L{x) 
and A(x) denote the length and area of the expanded curve. Show that 
L{x)/A(x) —> 0 as X —> oo and, more generally, L{x)/A{x)^ —> 0 as 
X —> 00 , if fc > i. Check for circle, square and, * ellipse. (Area is of 
a higher order of magnitude than circumference. See p. 472.) 

(116) Often the exponential function occurs in combinations given 
and denoted as follows: 

u = sinhx = i(e* — e"*), v = cosh x = J(e* + 

g* — g-* 

w = tanh X = -. 

g. + e-* 

called hyperbolic sine, hyperbolic cosine, and hyperbolic tangent respec¬ 
tively. These functions have many properties analogous to those of 



604 


APPENDIX 


the trigonometric functions; they are linked to the hsrperbola w* — v* = 1 
much as the functions w *= cos x and i; = sin x are linked to the circle 
u* + v* =B 1. The following facts should be proved by the reader and 
compared with the corresponding facts concerning trigonometric 
functions: 

D cosh X = sinh x, D sinh x = cosh x, D tanh x = l/cosh*x, 
sinh (x + x') = sinh x. cosh x' + cosh x sinh x', 
cosh (x + x') = cosh x-cosh x' + sinh x-sinh x'. 

The inverse functions are called x = arc sinh w = log (w + + 1); 

r «= arc cosh v = log (v + \/v^ — 1) (v > 1). 

Their derivatives are given by 

D arc sinh u = - . — ■ ; D arc cosh v = ^ - 

Vl + Vv^ - 1 

D arc tanh w = . — - —(| I > 1). 

I w* 

(117) On the basis of Euler^s formula check the analogy between 
hyperbolic and trigonometric functions. 

(*118) Find simple summation formulas for 

sinh X + sinh 2x + • • • + sinh nx 
and 

J + cosh X + cosh 2x + • • • + cosh nx 
analogous to those in Exercise 14 for trigonometric functions. 

Technique of Integration 

The theorem of p. 439 reduces the problem of integrating a function 
/(x) between the limits a and b to that of finding a primitive function 
0{x) for/(x), i.e. one for which G'(x) = /(x). The integral is then simply 
the difference G(b) — G(a), For these primitive functions, which are 
determined by/(x) (except for an arbitrary additive constant), the name 
‘‘indefinite integral^' and the suggestive notation 

Gix) = j fix) dx, 

without limits of integration, is customary. (This notation may be 
misleading for the beginner; see the remark on p. 438.) 



TECHNIQUE OP INTEGRATION 


505 


Every formula of differentiation contains the solution of a problem of 
indefinite integration simply by interpreting it inversely as a formula of 
integration. We can extend this somewhat empirical procedure by two 
important rules, which are nothing but the equivalent of the rules of 
differentiation of a compound function and of a product of functions. 
In their integral form these are called the rules of integration by substitu¬ 
tion and integration by parts. 

A) The first rule results from the formula for the differentiation of a 
compound function, 

Hiu) = G{x), 

where 

X = 4'(u) and u = <p(x) 

are supposed to be functions of each other, uniquely determined in the 
interval under consideration. Then we have 


If 

we can write 


H'(u) = G\x)4>'{u). 
G'{x) =/(x), 

G(x) = J/W dx 


and also 

G\xW{u) = SixWiu), 

which, in consequence of the formula above for H'(u), is equivalent to 

H(u) = J du. 

Hence, since H(u) = G(x), 

(I) J /(*) dx = j /(i^(u))^'(w) du. 

Written in Leibniz’ notation (see p. 434) this rule takes the very 
suggestive form 


j /(x) dx = J fix) ^ du, 



606 


APPENDIX 


dx 

which means that the symbol dx may be replaced by the symbol -j- du, 

du 

dx 

just as if dx and du were numbers and ^ fraction. 

du 

The usefulness of formula (I) will be illustrated by a few examples. 

a) J f -r-— du. Here we start with the right hand side of (I), 

J ulogu 

substituting X = log w = ^(w). We then have ^'(w) = - , /(x) = 

u X 

hence 

/ir^ 

We can verify this result by differentiating both sides. We find 
1 d 

-- = _ (log log w), which is easily shown to be correct. 

w log w du 

b) d = / cot udu = I " du. Setting x = sin w = Mu) we find 

J J 8in u 

mm = cos u, /(x) = X, 

hence. 


or 


or 


J = J^ = \ogx 
j cot udu — log sin u. 


This result can again be verified by differentiation, 

c) In general, if we have an integral of the form 


/ 


iA(m) 


du. 


we set X = ^(u), f{x) ^ x and find 

J f — ss log X B log 
J X 



TECHNIQUE OF INTEGRATION 


607 


d)/=J 

/ sin X cos x dx. We put sin a: = w, cos x = ! 

’ ( 


J = 

/ u — dx — 

J dx 

udu — ^ sin^ X. 

II 

f logM 

1 U 

du. Set log w 

1 dx 

= X, - = — . Then 
u au 


J = 

/‘I*-) 

xdx = 1 = Klog w)V 


Then 


In the examples below (I) is used, starting from the left side, 
f) t/ = J . Set = u. Then x and ^ = 2u. There' 


fore 


J =z f - . 2udu = 2u = 2yfx . 

J u 

g) By the substitution x = au^ where a is a constant, we find 
f dx f dx 1 f 1 du 1 

J + x^ J du d^ I + ^ J a 1 + a o ‘ 

\/l — x^ dx. Set X = cos i/, — = — sin w. Then 

du 

J = — j sin^ udu = ■“ J ~ 


'du=-- + 


2 2 • 4 

Using sin 2u = 2 sin w cos w = 2 cos u\/ 1 — cos* w, we have 
J = — J arc cos X + ^x \/1 — x*. 

Evaluate the following indefinite integrals and verify the results by 
differentiation: 


119 ) J-r^r 

120) / >ie’’du. 

121 ) / 


dx 


w(log uY ' 


I x^ + 2ax + b' 

125 ) j <* Vr+T* (ft. 

126 ) J 


Vi -1* 


dt. 



508 


APPENDIX 


123) f . 128) f coa" t-aim.dt. 

129) Prove that f = - arc tanh -; f ~ = arc sinh 5. 

J a* — a a J y/a^ - x* o, 

(Compare examples g, h.) 

B) The rule (p. 428) for the dififerentiation of a product, 
(p(x)‘g(x))' = p(x).g'(x) + p'(x)-g(x), 
can be written as an integral formula: 

p(x).g(x) = j p(x) q'(x)dx + J p'(x).g(x)dx 
or 

(II) j p(x) q\x)dx = p(x)g(x) - j p'(x)-q(x) dx. 

In this form it is called the rule of integration by parts. This rule is 
useful when the function to be integrated can be written as a product of 
the form p(x)g'(x), where the primitive function g(x) of g'(x) is known. 
In that case formula (II) reduces the problem of finding the indefinite 
integral of p(x)g'(x) to that of the integration of the function p'(x)g(x), 
which is often much simpler to solve. 

Examples: 

a) J — j log xdx. Set p(x) = log x, g'(x) = 1, so that g(x) = x. 
Then (II) leads to 

J log X dx = X log X — J ~dx = X log X — X. 


b) J * j x log xdx. Set p(x) » logx, g'(x) = x. Then 

J-|logz-/|^dr = |logx-|. 

c) J j X Bin X dx. Here we set p{x) =» x, q{x) = —coax and find 

J X sin I dx = —X cos X + sin x. 



TECHNIQUE OF INTEGRATION 


609 


Evaluate the following integrals using integration by parts. 
130) j xe'dx. 132) J x‘logxdx (09^ -1). 


131) j x^cosxdx. (Hint: 133) j x^e^dx. (Hint: Use Ex. 130.) 
Apply (II) twice.) 

Integration by parts of the integral J sin*” x dx leads to a remarkable 

expression for the number v as an infinite product. To derive it we 
write the function sin*” x in the form sin*^"^ a:-sin x and integrate by 
parts between the limits 0 and ir/2. This leads to the formula 

rW2 /.T/2 

/ sin*^ xdx = (m — 1) sin”* * x cos* x dx 

Jo Jo 

Ar/2 pv/2 

= — (m — 1) j sin”* xdx + (m — 1) J sin”*"* x dx, 


or 

r'* . ^ , m -1 r'* . , 

/ sm xdx ^ - / Bin x dx, 

Jo m Jo 

because the first term on the right side of (II), pq, is equal to zero for 
the values 0 and 7r/2. By repeated application of the last formula we 

-t/2 

find the following value for /» = / sin” x dx (the formulas differ accord- 

Jo 

ing as m is even or odd); 

J _2n — 12n — 3 lx 
^■2n^2 ■ ■ ■ 2 2’ 


J _ 2n 2n — 2 2 

“ 2rr+l'2^r^l ■■■3' 

Since 0 < sin x < 1 for 0 < x < x/2, we have sin*""* x > sin*" x > 
sin*"'''^ X, so that 

/jn-l > Itn > Itn+l (SCC p. 414) 


or 





1. 




610 


APPENDIX 


Substituting the values calculated above for Iin-\, etc. in the last in¬ 
equalities, we find 

2n-l-l ^ I.3.3.5.6.7... (2n - l)(2n - l)(2n + 1) t - 
2n ^ 2.2.4.4.6.6... (2n)(2n) ‘2 ^ 

If we now pass to the limit as n —♦ « we see that the middle term tends 
to 1, hence we obtain Wallis’ product representation for ir/2: 


V 

2 


2.2-4.4-6-6 ••• 2n-2n • • • 

1.3.3.6-5.7... (in - l)(2n - l)(2n+1) ... 

_ 2‘"(n!/ 

[(2n)!p(2n -b 1) 


aa n —♦ 00 , 



SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 

GENERAL REFERENCES 

W. Ahrens. Mathematische Unterhaltungen und Spiele^ 2nd editioHi 
2 vols. Leipzig: Teubner, 1910. 

W. W. Rouse Ball. Mathematical Recreations and Essays, 11th edition, 
revised by H. S. M. Coxeter. New York: Macmillan, 1939. 

E. T. Bell. The Development of Mathematics. New York: McGraw- 

Hill, 1940. 

-. Men of Mathematics. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1937. 

T. Dantzig. Aspects of Science. New York: Macmillan, 1937. 

A. Dresden^ An Invitation to Mathematics. New York: Holt, 1936. 

F. Enriques. Questioni riguardanti le matematiche elementari, 3rd edi¬ 

tion, 2 vols. Bologna: Zanichelli, 1924 and 1926. 

E, Kasner and J. Newman. Mathematics and the Imagination. New 

York: Simon and Schuster, 1940. 

F. Klein. Elementary Mathematics from an Advanced Standpoint, trans¬ 

lated by E. R. Hedrick and C. A. Noble, 2 vols. New York: 
Macmillan, 1932 and 1939. 

M-. Kraitchik. La MatMmatique des Jeux. Brussels: Stevens, 1930. 

O. Neugebauer. Vorlesungen iiber Geschichte der antiken mathematischen 
Wissenschaften. Erster Band: Vorgriechische Mathematik. Ber¬ 
lin: Springer, 1934. 

H. Poincar^. The Foundations of Science. Lancaster, Pa.:Science 
Press, 1913. 

H. Rademacher und 0. Toeplitz. Von Zahlen und Figuren, 2nd edition. 
Berlin: Springer, 1933. 

B. Russell. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: Allen 

and Unwin, 1924. 

-. The Principles of Mathemcdics, 2nd edition. New York: 

Norton, 1938. 

D. E. Smith. A Source Book in Mathematics. New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1929. 

H. Steinhaus. Mathematical Snapshots. New York: Stechert, 1938. 

H. Weyl. ^The Mathematical Way of Thinking,'^ Science, XCII (1940}, 
p. 437 fif. 


511 



512 


SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 


H. Weyl. Philoaophie der Mathemaiik und Ncdurwisaenschaft, Handbuch 
der Philosophie, Bd. JI. Munich: Oldenbourg, 1920, pp. 3-162. 

CHAPTER I 

L. E. Dickson. Introduction to the Theory of Numbers. Chicago: 

University of Chicago Press, 1931. 

-. Modem Elementary Theory of Numbers. Chicago: University 

of Chicago Press, 1939. 

G. H. Hardy. “An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers,” Bulletin 
of the American Mathematical Society, XXXV (1929), p. 789 ff. 

G. H. Hardy and E. M. Wright. An Introduction to the Theory of 
Numbers. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1938. 

J. V. Uspensky and M. H. Heaslet. Elementary Number Theory. 

New York: McGraw-Hill, 1939. 

CHAPTER II 

G. Birkhoff and S. MacLane. A Survey of Modern Algebra. New 
York: Macmillan, 1941. 

M. Black. The Nature of Mathematics. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 

1935. 

T. Dantzig. Number, the Language of Science, 3rd edition. New York: 
Macmillan, 1939. 

G. H. Hardy. A Course of Pure Mathematics, 7th edition. Cambridge: 
University Press, 1938. 

K. Knopp. Theory and Application of Infinite Series, translated by 

Miss R. C. Young. London: Blackie, 1928. 

A. Tarski. Introduction to Logic. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1939. 

F. Enriques. The Historic DevehpmerU of Logic, translated by J. Rosen¬ 
thal. New York: Holt, 1929. 

CHAPTER III 

J. L. Coolidge. A History of Geometrical Methods. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1940. 

A. De Morgan. A Budget of Paradoxes, 2 vols. Chicago: Open Court, 
1915. 

L. E. Dickson. New First Course in the Theory of Equations. New 

York: Wiley, 1939. 



SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 613 

F. Enriques (editor). Fragen der Elementargeometrie, 2nd edition, 
2 vols. Leipzig: Teubner, 1923. 

E. W. Hobson. Squaring the Circle,” a History of the Problem. Cam¬ 

bridge: University Press, 1913. 

A. B. Kempe. How to Draw a Straight Line. London: Macmillan, 
1877. 

F. Klein. Famous Problems of Geometry, translated by W. W. Beman 

and D. E. Smith, 2nd edition. New York: Stechert, 1930. 

L. Mascheroni. La geometria del compasso. Palermo: Reber, 1901.* 

G. Mohr. Euclides Danicus. Copenhagen: Hplst, 1928. 

J. M. Thomas. Theory of Equations. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1938. 

L. Weisner. Introduction to the Theory of Equations. New York: 

Wiley, 1939. 

CHAPTER IV 

W. C. Graustein. Introduction to Higher Geometry. New York: Mac¬ 
millan, 1930. 

D. Hilbert. The Foundations of Geometry, translated by E. J. Town¬ 
send, 3rd edition. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court, 1938. 

C. W. O’Hara and D. R. Ward. An Introduction to Projective Geom¬ 

etry. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1937. 

G. de B. Robinson. The Foundations of Geometry. Toronto: Uni¬ 
versity of Toronto Press, 1940. 

Girolamo Saccheri. Euclides ab omni naevo vindicatus, translated by 
G. B. Halsted. Chicago: Open Court, 1920. 

R. G. Sanger. Synthetic Projective Geometry. New York: McGraw- 
Hill, 1939. 

O. Veblen and J. W. Young. Projective Geometry, 2 vols. Boston: 

Ginn, 1910 and 1918. 

J. W. Young. Projective Geometry. Chicago: Open Court, 1930. 

CHAPTER V 

P. Alexandroff. Einfachste Grundbegriffe der Topohgie. Berlin: 
Springer, 1932. 

D. Hilbert und S. Cohn-Vossen. Anschauliche Geometric. Berlin: 
Springer, 1932. 

M. H. A. Newman. Elements of the Topology of Plane Sets of Points. 
Cambridge: University Press, 1939. 

H. Seifert und W. Threlfall. Lehrbueh der Topohgie. Leipzig: Teub¬ 

ner, 1934. 



514 


SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 


CHAPTER VI 

R. Courant. Differential and Integral Calculus, translated by E. J. 
McShane, revised edition, 2 vols. New York: Nordemann, 1940. 

G. H. Hardy. A Course of Pure Mathematics, 7th edition. Cambridge: 
University Press, 1938. 

W. L. Ferrar. A Text-book of Convergence. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1938. 

For the theory of continued fractions see, e.g. 

S. Barnard and J. M. Child. Advanced Algebra, London: Mac¬ 

millan, 1939. 


CHAPTER VII 

R. Courant. “Soap Film Experiments with Minimal Surfaces,” Ameri¬ 
can Mathematical Monthly, XLVII (1940), pp. 167-174. 

J. Plateau. “Sur les figures d'4quilibi‘e d’une masse liquide sans 
p6santeur,” M^moires de VAcaMnie Royale de Belgique, nouvelle 
s4rie, XXIII (1849). 

-. Statique exp6rimenlale et tJUoretique des Uquides. Paris: 1873. 

CHAPTER VIII 

C. B. Boyer. The Concepts of the Calculus. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1939. 

R. Courant. Differential and Integral Calculus, translated by E. J. Mc¬ 
Shane, revised edition, 2 vols. New York: Nordemann, 1940. 

G. H. Hardy. A Course of Pure Mathematics, 7th edition. Cambridge: 
University Press, 1938. 



INDEX 


absolute value, 67 
acceleration, 426 

addition, of complex numbers, 90 
of natural numbers, 1~3 
of rational numbers, 63 
of real numbers, 70 
of sets, 110 

adjunction of irrationals, 132 
algebra. Boolean, 114 
fundamental theorem of, 101-103, 
269-271 

of number fields, 117-140 
of sets, 108-116 

algebraic equations, 101-103 , 269-271 
algebraic numbers, 103-104 
algorithm, definition of, 44 
Euclidean, 42-61 

analytic geometry, 72-77, 191-196, 488- 
494 

of n dimensions, 228-230 
angle of complex number, 94 
antecedent point of mapping, 141 
Apollonius* problem, 117,125-127,161-162 
Archimedes* trisection of the angle, 138 
area, 399-401, 464-465 
arithmetic, fundamental theorem of, 
23, 46-48 
laws of, 1-4 

arithmetical mean, 361-365 
arithmetical progressions, 12-13, 487-488 
primes in, 26-27 

associative laws, for natural numbers, 2 
for rational numbers, 54 
for sets, 110 

asymptotes of hyperbola, 76 
asymptotically equal, 29 
axes of conics, 75-76 
axes of coordinates, 73 
axiomatics, 214-217 
axioms^ 214-217 


bicontinuous (« continuous in both 
directions), 241 
binomial series, 475-476 
binomial theorem, 16-18 
bisection of segment with compass alone, 
145 

biunique correspondence, 78 
Bolzano’s theorem, 312-313 
applications of, 317-321 
Boolean algebra, 114 
boundary conditions in extremum prob¬ 
lems, 376-379 
bounded sequence, 295 
brachistochrone problem, 379-381, 383- 
384 

Brianchon’s theorem, 190, 191, 209-21i' 

calculus, 398-486, 502-610 
fundamental theorem of, 436-439 
calculus of variations, 379-385 
Cantor’s middle thirds set, 248-249 
Cantor's theory of infinite sets, 77-86 
cardinal number, 83-86 
Cartesian coordinates, 72-74 
center of circle, compass construction 
of, 146 

characteristic, Euler’s, 236-240, 258- 
259, 262 

circle, equation of, 74 
classification (topological) of surfaces, 
256-264 

coaxial planes, 176 
collinear points, 170 
combinatorial geometry, 230-234 
commutative laws, for natural num¬ 
bers, 2 

for rational numbers, 54 
for sets, 110 
compact sets, 316 

compass constructions, 145-146, 147-151 
complement of a set, 111 



516 


INDEX 


complete quadrilateral, 179-180 
complex conjugate, 93 
complex numbers, 88-103 
absolute value of, 93 
angle of, 94 
modulus of, 93 
operations with, 90-91 
trigonometric representation of, 95 
complex variable, theory of functions of 
a, 478-479 

composite numbers, 22 
compound functions, 281-283 
compound interest, 457 
concurrent lines, 170 
congruence of geometrical figures, 166 
congruences (arithmetical), 31-40 
conics, 198-212 
equations of, 74-77 
line, 207 

metric definition of, 199, 494, 496 
point, 204 

projective definition of, 204 
conjugate, complex, 93 
conjugate, harmonic, 175-176 
connectivity, 243-244 
constant, 273 

constructible numbers and number fields, 
127-134 

definition, 132-133 
constructions, geometrical, 117-164 
Mascheroni, 147-151 
of number fields, 120-127 
of rational quantities, 120-122 
of regular polygons, 122-125 
of square roots, 122 
with compass alone, 145-146, 147-152 
with straightedge alone, 151-152, 196- 
198 

with various instruments, 140-164 
constructive proof, 86 
continued fractions, 49-51, 301-303 
continuity of function of one variable, 
283-286, 310-312, 327-328, 423 
continuity of function of several vari¬ 
ables, 288 

continuous variable, 274 
continuum hypothesis. 88 


continuum of real numbers, 68 
denumerability of, 79-80 
contour lines, 286-287 
convergence, of sequences, 294 
of series, 472, 478-479 
coordinates, general, 192 
homogeneous, 193-196 
rectangular (Cartesian), 73 
coplanar lines, 176 
correspondence, for sets, 78 
projective, 178, 204 
counting, 78 
cross-cap, 261, 262 
cross-ratio, 172-180, 185 
curvature, mean, 386-387 
curve, equation of, 74-77 
length of, 466-469 
cut (in real number system), 71-72 
cycloids, 152-155, 380-381 
cyclotomic equation, 99-100 

damped oscillations, 459 

decagon, construction of regular, 122-123 

decimal fractions, 61-03 

Dedekind cut, 71-72 

deformation, 242 

delta (A), 402 

De Moivre's theorem, 96, 98-100 
density of rational numbers, 58 
denumerability of rational numbers, 
79-80 

dependent variable, 275 
derivative, 414-433 
second, 426, 435 

Desargues’s theorem, 170-172, 187-188 
differential equations, 453-461 
differential quotient, 434 
differentials, 433-436 
differentiation, 417, 423, 427-433, 462-464 
dimension, 248-251 
Diophantine equations, 50-51 
Dirichlet's principle, 368 
discontinuities of functions, 284-286 
discontinuous functions as limits of con¬ 
tinuous functions, 325 
distance, 74, 316 



INDEX 


617 


distributive laws, for natural numbers, 2 
for rational numbers, 64 
for sets, 110 

divergence, of sequences, 294 
of series, 472 

division by zero excluded, 66, 90 
domain of a variable, 273 
doubling of the cube, 117, 134-135, 146, 
147 

duality, principle of, in algebra of sets, 
112 

in geometry, 191, 193-196, 209, 217 
duodecimal system, 6 
dyadic system, 8 
dynamics, Newtonian, 460-461 

«, Euler’s number, 297-299 
as base of natural logarithms, 445 
as limit, 448-450 
expressions for, 298, 302, 303 
irrationality of, 298-299 
eccentricity (of conics), 75 
ficole Poly technique, 167 
ellipse, equation of, 75 
tangent properties of, 333 *334 
elliptic geometry, 224-227 
elliptic points, 226 
empirical induction, 10 
empty set, 18 
epicycloid, 155 
equation, cyclotomic, 99-100 
Diophantine, 50-55 
multiplicity of roots of, 102 
of a curve, 74-77 
of circle, 74 
of ellipse, 75, 494 
of hyperbola, 75-76, 494 
of straight line, 75, 490-492 
quadratic, 91-92, 302 
roots of, 101 

equations of motion, 460-461 
equivalence of sets, 78 
Eratosthenes, sieve of, 25 
ergodic motion, 353-354 
Erlanger program, 167 
Euclidean algorithm, 42-51 
Euler’s characteristic, 236-240, 258-259, 
262, 496-497 

Euler’s phi-function. 48-49 


excluded middle, law of, 86 
exhaustion, method of, 400 
existence, mathematical, 88 
existence proofs, 86, 366-373 
experimental solution of minimum prob¬ 
lems, 385-397 

exponential function, 446-447, 449-460 
differential equation of, 454-457 
order of magnitude of, 469-470 
extension field, 129 

extraction of square root, geometrical, 
122 

extrema and inequalities, 361-366 
extreme distances to given curve, 336-338 
extremum problems, 329-397 
general principle in, 338-341 
in elementary geometry, 330-338 
with boundary conditions, 376-379 

factorial n, 17 

factorization, unique, 23, 46-48 
factors, prime, 23 
Fermat numbers, 25, 119 
Fermat’s last theorem, 40-42 
Fermat’s principle, 381-383 
Fermat’s theorem, 37-38, 49 
field, 66 

fields, algebra of number, 117-140 
geometric construction of, 120-127 
five color theorem, 264-267 
fixed point theorem, 251-255 
focus of conic, 75 
formalism, 88, 216 
foundations of mathematics, 87-88 
four color problem, 246-248 
fractions, decimal, 61-63 
continued, 49-51, 301-303 
functions (and limits), 272-328 
functions, compound, 282-283 
continuity of, 283-286, 288, 310-312, 
327-328 
convex, 500 
definition of, 274 
graphs of, 278 
inverse, 278-281 
monotone, 280 

of a complex variable, 478-479 
of several variables, 286-288 
primitive, 438 



518 


INDEX 


fundamental theorem of algebra, 101* 
103, 200-271 

fundamental theorem of arithmetic, 23, 
46-48 

fundamental theorem of the calculus, 
430-439 

generalization, principle of, 56 
genus of surface, 256-258, 262 
geodesic, 226 

geodesics on a sphere, 384-385 
geometrical constructions, theory of, 
117-164 

geometrical mean, 361-365 
geometrical progression, 13-14 
geometrical series, 65-66 
geometrical transformations, 140-141, 
165-167 

geometry, analytic, 72-77,191-196, 488- 
494 

axioms in, 214-217 
combinatorial, 230-234 
elliptic, 224-227 

extremum problems in elementary, 
330-338 

hyperbolic, 218-224 
inversion, 140-146, 158-164 
metric, 169 
n-dimensional, 227-234 
non-Euclidean, 218-227 
projective, 165-214 
Riemannian, 224-227 
synthetic, 165 

theory of constructions in, 117-164, 
196-198 

topological, 235-271 
Goldbach’s theorem, 30-31 
graph of a function, 279 
greatest common divisor, 43-45 
Greek problems, three famous, 117, 
134r-140 

growth, law of, 457 
group, 168 

harmonic conjugate, 175-176 
harmonic cross-ratio, 175-176 
harmonic series, 479-480 
Hart's inversor. 157-158 


heptagon, impossibility of constructing 
regular, 138-139 
Heron’s theorem, 330-332 
hexagon, construction of regular, 123 
homogeneous codrdinates, 193-196 
hyperbola, equations of, 75-76 
tangent properties of, 334-336 
hyperbolic functions, 603-504 
hyperbolic geometry, 214-224 
hyperbolic points, 226 
paraboloid, 286 
hyperboloid, 212-214 
hypocycloid, 154 

ideal elements in projective geometry, 
180-185 

image point (of mapping), 141 
imaginary numbers (see complex num¬ 
bers) 

incidence, 169 

incommensurable segments, 58-61 
independent variable, 275 
indirect proof, 86-87 
induction, empirical, 10 
mathematical, 9-20 

inequalities, 3-4, 15-16, 67, 58, 94, 322, 
361-366, 601 

infinite continued fractions, 301-303 
infinite decimals, 61-63 
infinite products, 300, 481-482 
infinite series, 63-66, 472-477 
''infinitely small,” 433-436 
infinitude of primes, 22, 26-27,481 
infinity, 66, 77-88 

elements at (in projective geometry), 
180-185 

mathematical analysis of, 77-88 
point at (in inversion geometry), 142 
integer, principle of the smallest, 18-19 
integers, negative, 55 
positive, 1-9 

integral, 399-414, 464-465, 504-510 
interest, compound, 457 
intersection of sets, 110 
interval, 57 
intervals, nested, 68 
intuitionism, 86-87, 215 



INDEX 


619 


invariance, 165-167 
of angles under inversion, 158-169 
of cross-ratio, 173-174 
inverse functions, 278-281 
inverse operations, 3 
inverse points, 141 
construction of, 144-145 
inversion geometry, 140-146, 158-164 
inversors, 155-168 

irrational numbers, as infinite decimals, 
63 

defined by cuts, 71-72 
defined by nested intervals, 68-71 
defined by sequences, 72 
isoperimetric problems, 373-376 
iteration, limits by, 326^27 

Jordan curve theorem, 244-246, 267-260 
jump discontinuity, 2^ 

Klein's bottle, 262 
Klein's model, 219-222 
knots, 265-266 

least squares, method of, 365-366 
Leibniz' formula for t, 441 
length of a curve, 466-469 
level lines, 286-287 

light rays, extremum property of, 
330-332 

light triangles, 362-363 
limits, 289-321 

by continuous approach, 303-312 
by iteration, 326-327 
examples on, 322-327 
of geometrical series, 66-66 
of infinite decimals, 63-66 
of sequences, 289-303 
line at infinity, 182 
line conic, 207 
lines, concurrent, 170 
contour, 286-287 
coplanar, 176 
pencil of, 203 
linkages, 155-168 
Idouville's theorem, 104-107 
logarithm, natural, 28, 443-446, 460-453, 
460-470 

log nl, order of magnitude of, 471.-472 


logic, mathematical, 87-88, 112-114 
logical product, 110 
logical sum, 110 

magnitude, orders of, 469-472 
map, regular, 264 

map-coloring problem, 246-248, 264-267 
mapping, 141 

Mascheroni constructions, 147-162 
mathematical induction, 9-20 
mathematical logic, 87-88, 112-114 
maxima and minima, 329-397, 426-427, 
433 

mean, arithmetical, 361-366 
mean, geometrical, 361-366 
means, inequality connecting, 361-366 
mechanical instruments, constructions 
with, 162-165 
metamathematics, 88 
metric geometry, 169 
minimax, points of, 343-346 
modulo d, 32 

modulus of complex number, 93 
Moebius strip, 269-262 
monotone function, 280 
monotone sequence, 296-297 
Morse relations, 345 
motion, equations of, 460-461 
ergodic, 363-354 
rigid, 141 

multiplicity of roots of algebraic equa¬ 
tion, 102 

natural numbers, 1-20 
n-dimensional geometry, 227-1'^ 
negative numbers, 64-55 
Newtonian dynamics, 460-461 
non-denumerability of continuum, 81-8^ 
non-Euclidean geometry, 218-227 
number fields, 127-134 
number system, 61-107 
numbers, algebraic, 103-104 
cardinal, 83-86 
complex, 88-103 
composite, 22 
constructible, 127-134 
Fermat, 25, 119 
natural, 1-20 
negative, 64-56 



520 


INDEX 


numbers, prime, 21-31 
Pythagorean, 40-42 
rational, 52-58 
real, 58-72 

transcendental, 103-104 

one-sided surfaces, 259-264. 
orders of magnitude, 469-472 

Pappus’ theorem, 188 
paradoxes of the infinite, 87 
paradoxes of Zeno, 305-306 
parallel postulate, 218 
parallelism and infinity, 180-185 
Pascal’s theorem, 188, 191, 209-212 
Pascal’s Triangle, 17 
Peaucellier’s inversor, 155-157 
pencil of lines, 203 

pentagon, construction of regular, 100, 
122-123 

perspective, 169 
pi, 140, 299-300, 303, 441-442 
plane at infinity, 184-185 
Plateau’s problem, 386 
point conic, 204 
points, at infinity, 180-185 
collinear, 170 
range of, 207 

polyhedra, Euler characteristic of, 236- 
240, 258-259, 262 
genus of, 256-258, 262 
in n dimensions, 227-234 
one-sided, 259-262 
regular, 236-240 
simple, 236 
positional notation, 4 
postulates, 214 

prime number theorem, 27-30, 482-486 
primes, 21-31, 481, 482-486 
primitive functions, 438 
probability, 114-116 
product, infinite, 300, 481-482 
logical, 110 

progressions, arithmetical, 12-13, 26-27, 
487-488 

geometrical, 13-14 
projective correspondence, 178-204 
projective geometry, 165-214 


projective transformation, 167-170 
proof; constructive, indirect, and exis¬ 
tential, 86-87 

Pythagorean numbers, 40-42 
quadrants, 73 

quadratic equation, 91-92,302 
quadratic residues, 38 
quadric surfaces, 212-214 
quadrilateral, complete, 179-180 

radian measure, 277-278 
radioactive disintegration, 455-457 
range of points, 207 
rational numbers, 52-58 
density of, 58 
denumerability of, 79-80 
operations with, 53-54 
rational quantities, geometrical con¬ 
struction of, 120-122 
real numbers, 58-72 
continuum of, 68 
operations with, 70-71 
reflection, general extremum problems 
in, 353-354 
in a circle, 140-146 
in a system of circles, 163-164 
in one or more lines, 330-332 
in triangles, 352-353 
repeated, 162-164 

regular polygons, construction of, 119, 
122-125, 495 

regular polyhedra, 236-240 
n-dimensional, 227-234 
relativity, 227, 229 
residues, quadratic, 38-40 
Riemannian geometry, 224-227 
rigid motion, 141 
roots of unity, 98-100 

Schwarz’s triangle problem, 346-354, 377 
second derivative, 435, 426 
segment, 57, 73 
sense (of angles), 159 
septimal system, 5-6, 7-8 
sequences, 289-303 
l^unded, 295 

convergent, divergent, and oscillating 
294 



INDEX 


621 


sequences, monotone, 295-297 
theorem on, 315-316 
series, infinite, 472-477 
set, 78 
compact, 316 
complement of. 111 
empty, 18 

sets, algebra of, 108-116 
equivalence of, 78 
sieve of Eratosthenes, 25 
simple closed curve, 244 
simple polyhedron, 236 
simply connected, 243 
slope, 415, 490 

smallest integer, principle of, 18-19 
soap film experiments, 385-397 
solvability of problems, 118 
square root, geometrical construction 
of, 122 

squaring the circle, 140, 147 
stationary points, 341-346 
Steiner constructions, 151-152, 196-198 
Steiner's problem, 3^361, 377-379, 391 
straightedge constructions, 151-152,196- 
198 

straight line, equation of, 75 
street network problem, 359-361 
subfield, 138 
subscripts, 5 
subset, 109 
proper, 78 
sum, logical, 110 
sum of first n cubes, 15 
sum of first n squares, 14 
surfaces, one-sided, 259-264 
quadric, 212-214 
synthetic geometry, 165 

tangent, 415 

tangent properties of ellipse and hyper¬ 
bola, 333-336 
Taylor series, 476-477 
theory of numbers, 21-51, 481, 482-486 


topology, 235-271 
and critical points, 345 
topological classification of surfaces, 
256-264 

topological transformation, 241 
torus, 248 

three-dimensional, 262-264 
transcendence of pi, 104,140 
transcendental numbers, 103-104, 104- 
107 

transformations, equations of, 288-289 
geometrical, 140-141, 165-167 
projective, 167-170 
topological, 241 

triangles, extremum properties of, 330, 
332-333, 346-353, 354-359 
trigonometric functions, definition of, 277 
trisection of angle, 117,137-138 

union (of sets), 110 

unique factorization, 23, 46-48 

unit circle, 93 

unity, roots of, 98-100 

unsolvability of Greek problems, 134-140 

unsolvability, proofs of, 120-140 

variable, 273-277 
complex, 478 
dependent, 275 
general notion of, 273 
independent, 275 
real, 274 

variations, calculus of, 379-385 
vector, 73 
velocity, 423-425 
vibrations, 458-459 

Wallis' product, 482, 509-510 
Weierstrass' theorem on extreme values, 
313-315, 316 
work, 465-466 

zero, 4 

zeta-function, 480-481 





